SOURCE: FoodFacts.org.za
TITLE: Opinions
URL: https://foodfacts.org.za/opinions/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Easy Opening Food Cans – a safe and easy can opening guide from Nampak R&D
Nitrates and Nitrites in your food
Are any foods safe to eat anymore?
“MOSTLY I think there’s just an emotional attachment to culture and tradition. People have this belief that just because something is natural it’s good. The natural state of man is ignorant, and starving, and cold. We have technology that makes our lives better. It doesn’t make sense that you would keep technology out of this very important part of life … “I mean, honestly, nutritionally speaking, canned vegetables are better than fresh ones because fresh ones are decaying. They’re out in the air being oxidised. Bacteria are feasting on them. But if you can them, you seal them at the peak of freshness and the nutrients stay intact. So, it seems kind of backwards I think, actually, to go for fresh?”
Rob Rhinehart, inventor of Soylent food replacement
The war on meat is part of the war on humans
“I DON’T mind if people decide to go vegan or vegetarian. That’s a personal decision demonstrating our exceptionalism as human beings. What other species would forego natural and nutritious food to make a moral point? But the idea that most of us will give up meat to ‘save the planet’ is, well, hogwash. “Yet the ‘what if’ articles keep coming. The latest is from Slate, byline BV Anderson, who asks: “What if Everyone in the World Became a Vegetarian?” ….. The world is almost saved! At least Anderson notes that doing away with food animals would ruin economies: ‘The production and sale of animal products account for 1.3 billion people’s jobs, and 987 million of those people are poor. If demand for meat were to disappear overnight, those people’s livelihoods would disappear…’ ” … Actually, Anderson’s article doesn’t even begin to assess the economic obliteration that doing away with meat animals would cause. Indeed, she fails to address how thoroughly animal products grease the wheels – literally – of society.”
Wesley J Smith, Discovery Institute, read more
“THEY make you hungry, they make you obsessed with food and if the Institute of Medicine’s stats are anything to go by, they don’t make you thinner anyway, at least not for anything longer than a few weeks, making the whole thing so depressing I want to bang my head against a brick wall. Which, given our insatiable hunger for new diet regimes, will probably be plastered with posters advertising the latest weight-loss plan.
Caroline Corcoran, Independent columnist, writing on ‘International No Diet Day’, May 7.
Multivitamins Are a Waste of Money, Doctors Say
People should stop wasting their money on dietary supplements, some physicians said, in response to three large new studies that showed most multivitamin supplements are ineffective at reducing the risk of disease, and may even cause harm. The new studies, published (Dec. 16) in the journal Annals of Internal Medicine -including two new clinical trials and one large review of 27 past clinical trials conducted by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force – found no evidence that taking daily multivitamin and mineral supplements prevents or slows down the progress of cognitive decline or chronic diseases such as heart diseases or cancer. “The message is simple: Most supplements do not prevent chronic disease or death, their use is not justified and they should be avoided,” the physicians wrote in an editorial published along with the studies. This message is especially aimed at people who have no signs of nutritional deficiency – meaning most supplement users in the United States, the researchers said. “Study after study comes back negative – yet people continue to take supplements, now at record rates,” said Dr. Edgar Miller, one of the five authors of the editorial and a professor of medicine and epidemiology at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. Scientific American Dec. 17, 2013 http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=multivitamins-are-a-waste-of-money-doctors-say&WT.mc_id=SA_CAT_HLTH_20131217