SOURCE: HEALTHLINE
URL: https://www.healthline.com/cbd
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

CBD may have health benefits, and gummies are a great place for CBD-curious folks to start.
CBD gummies are easy to dose, portable, and discreet. They also come in various flavors, making them a good choice for people looking to try CBD for the first time.
CBD gummies are most suitable for internal concerns and general well-being. Many people find they ease symptoms of anxiety or sleeplessness.
Because CBD gummies, your digestive system processes them. This means it may take longer for you to feel the effects of the gummies than when using a CBD oil under the tongue.
CBD gummies can take up to 2 hours to start working. Unlike other CBD consumption methods, such as vaping, your body needs to digest and metabolize edibles before you can feel their effects.
Several factors can influence how quickly you feel the effects of CBD gummies. These factors include your:
Consider the following when buying CBD gummies to make sure you’re getting the best quality and the right product for your needs.
The first thing to consider when purchasing CBD gummies is the type of CBD used. There are three types of CBD:
There is a lot more to CBD gummies than just CBD. Other ingredients can vary widely. Pay attention to additives like artificial ingredients and preservatives. Consider CBD gummies made with organic, non-GMO ingredients and real sugar and natural flavorings.
Doses vary widely across CBD products, and potency may depend on the CBD source. For example, a 5-milligram (mg) full-spectrum CBD gummy may feel a lot more potent than a 5-mg CBD isolate gummy.
When trying CBD gummies for the first time, start with the lowest dose available — generally 2.5 to 5 mg — and increase from there.
Our health editors and medical team evaluated more than 150 CBD gummies to make sure that third-party testing results are current, show no contaminants, and contain only allowable levels of THC.
In addition, we made sure the products didn’t make any unrealistic or misleading health claims. Then, we chose products to test firsthand and narrowed down our top picks to these:
Start slowly. Most gummies come in packs of 20 to 60, and they’re dosed at 5 mg or more of CBD per gummy. If you’ve never tried CBD, start with a 5-mg gummy. Some gummies can be cut in half, so you can start with 2.5 mg.
Evaluate any effects as you slowly work your way toward finding the right amount for you. Wait up to 2 hours before taking any additional CBD. Then, if you feel like you need more, experiment until you find your “just right” dose.
You can consume gummies daily, but keep in mind that the effects of a gummy tend to last 4 to 6 hours.