SOURCE: INDIANEXPRESS
URL: https://indianexpress.com/section/lifestyle/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Jamie Lever shared how her brother Jessey’s childhood tumour and surgeries changed their family’s life. An expert explains the emotional impact serious illness can have on parents and siblings.
One should monitor their cycle closely and consult a doctor to eliminate possible diseases such as hormonal disorders or reproductive health problems.
Consistent habits that support gut health can positively influence overall appearance and comfort
The silver, bell shaped accessories have been an integral part of Indian jewellery for decades now. But the brand simply described them as "vintage accessories," without any reference to their South Asian origins.
Priyanka Chopra opened up about her emotional roka ceremony with Nick Jonas and the moment their relationship began to feel “real.” Expert explains why rituals and early certainty can strengthen commitment.
Muesli, cornflakes, granola -- with so many varieties lining store shelves, it's easy to get overwhelmed.
For the semi-final match last week against England, Hardik Pandya was seen sporting a Richard Mille RM 67-02 “Italy”, a tribute to Italian craftsmanship, combining the strength of Carbon TPT with the bold colours of the Italian flag.
Actor Ahaan Panday reveals the 'most painful' surgery that derailed his fitness journey. Discover how he overcame a major shoulder injury and what experts say about regaining muscle memory.
"I was the first woman he said I love you to. He keeps teasing me about it," Khushbu said.
Across land, sea, and air, they use a mix of stealth, mimicry, and lightning-fast attacks to feed, and in some cases, defend themselves.
Nighttime acid reflux isn’t just uncomfortable—it can quietly disrupt sleep and damage the oesophagus. Doctors explain why symptoms flare after dark and the everyday fixes that actually help.
The HbA1c test shows the blood glucose levels over a period of three months
Egg freezing can be empowering, but it's important to approach it with clear information and realistic expectations
There are several types of seizures, such as Tonic-clonic seizures, Absence seizures, Myoclonic seizures, and Atonic seizures
Arjun Tendulkar and Saaniya Chandhok recently got married at St Regis in Mumbai.
Micronutrients may represent an intervention that is both accessible and responsive to the specific needs of youth who are most at risk.
"I said mai kabhi nahi chorh paunga, aur ye app se toh...But I was so desperate to give up smoking," Arshad Warsi added.
Saffron, the world’s most expensive and rare spice, is a precious ingredient which is used as a garnish as well as an integral part in several dishes and desserts as part of the Indian cuisine.