TOPIC: protein requirement vegetarian diet India
1. Indian J Med Res. 1983 May;77:658-67.
Determination of protein requirements in healthy male volunteers on vegetarian
Bhatia BD, Agarwal DK, Agarwal KN.
PMID: 6618539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
2. Front Nutr. 2023 May 18;10:1110750. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2023.1110750.
Underutilized legumes: nutrient status and advanced breeding approaches for
qualitative and quantitative enhancement.
Samal I(1), Bhoi TK(2), Raj MN(3), Majhi PK(4), Murmu S(5), Pradhan AK(6), Kumar
D(7), Paschapur AU(8), Joshi DC(8), Guru PN(9).
(1)Department of Entomology, Faculty of Agriculture, Sri Sri University,
Cuttack, Odisha, India.
(2)Forest Protection Division, ICFRE-Arid Forest Research Institute, Jodhpur,
(3)Division of Entomology, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New
(4)Regional Research and Technology Transfer Station, Odisha University of
Agriculture and Technology, Keonjhar, Odisha, India.
(5)ICAR-Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, New Delhi, India.
(6)ICAR-National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack, Odisha, India.
(7)ICAR-National Institute of Agricultural Economics and Policy Research, New
(8)ICAR-Vivekananda Parvatiya Krishi Anusandhan Sansthan, Uttarakhand, India.
(9)ICAR-Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and Technology, Ludhiana,
Underutilized/orphan legumes provide food and nutritional security to
resource-poor rural populations during periods of drought and extreme hunger,
thus, saving millions of lives. The Leguminaceae, which is the third largest
flowering plant family, has approximately 650 genera and 20,000 species and are
distributed globally. There are various protein-rich accessible and edible
legumes, such as soybean, cowpea, and others; nevertheless, their consumption
rate is far higher than production, owing to ever-increasing demand. The growing
global urge to switch from an animal-based protein diet to a vegetarian-based
protein diet has also accelerated their demand. In this context, underutilized
legumes offer significant potential for food security, nutritional requirements,
and agricultural development. Many of the known legumes like Mucuna spp.,
Canavalia spp., Sesbania spp., Phaseolus spp., and others are reported to
contain comparable amounts of protein, essential amino acids, polyunsaturated
fatty acids (PUFAs), dietary fiber, essential minerals and vitamins along with
other bioactive compounds. Keeping this in mind, the current review focuses on
the potential of discovering underutilized legumes as a source of food, feed and
pharmaceutically valuable chemicals, in order to provide baseline data for
addressing malnutrition-related problems and sustaining pulse needs across the
globe. There is a scarcity of information about underutilized legumes and is
restricted to specific geographical zones with local or traditional
significance. Around 700 genera and 20,000 species remain for domestication,
improvement, and mainstreaming. Significant efforts in research, breeding, and
development are required to transform existing local landraces of carefully
selected, promising crops into types with broad adaptability and economic
viability. Different breeding efforts and the use of biotechnological methods
such as micro-propagation, molecular markers research and genetic transformation
for the development of underutilized crops are offered to popularize
lesser-known legume crops and help farmers diversify their agricultural systems
and boost their profitability.
Copyright © 2023 Samal, Bhoi, Raj, Majhi, Murmu, Pradhan, Kumar, Paschapur,
DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2023.1110750
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
3. Nutrition. 2010 Apr;26(4):390-8. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2009.05.018. Epub 2009 Jul
Diet patterns of lactovegetarian adolescent girls: need for devising recipes
with high zinc bioavailability.
Tupe R(1), Chiplonkar SA.
(1)Agharkar Research Institute, Pune, India.
OBJECTIVE: Populations subsisting on plant foods are believed to be at a high
risk of mineral deficiencies. The aim of the present study was to examine the
diet patterns of vegetarian adolescent girls for zinc adequacy and devise
recipes to improve bioavailable zinc intakes.
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey was carried out in 630 schoolgirls (10-16 y
old) from Pune, India, from 2006 to 2007. Diet was assessed by a 24-h recall
method on 3 random days. Diet patterns were identified by principal component
analysis. Nutrient intakes were estimated using the cooked-foods database of our
laboratory. Twenty recipes representing the diet patterns were formulated using
foods that have a high zinc content and using methods such as
sprouting/fermentation. In vitro zinc dialyzability of the recipes was
determined by simulating gastrointestinal conditions and atomic absorption
RESULTS: Five diet patterns were identified reflecting intakes of different
cereals. Girls in the five diet patterns had inadequate intakes of energy,
protein, and micronutrients including zinc compared with the recommended dietary
intakes of India. In the new cereal-based recipes, the average contents of
energy, protein, iron, calcium, zinc, beta-carotene, and vitamin C per 100g of
cooked weight were 205 kcal, 6.2g, 2.5mg, 105 mg, 1.5mg, 716 microg, and 4.4 mg,
respectively. Therefore, a supplement of 200 g of the recipe would fulfil 75% of
the daily zinc requirement of adolescents and increase other micronutrient
CONCLUSION: Diets of Indian schoolgirls were deficient in zinc. Zinc-rich
recipes with high bioavailability have the potential to alleviate zinc
deficiency in adolescents.
Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.nut.2009.05.018
PMID: 19628369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
4. Nutr J. 2014 Jun 4;13:55. doi: 10.1186/1475-2891-13-55.
Nutritional profile of Indian vegetarian diets--the Indian Migration Study
Shridhar K(1), Dhillon PK, Bowen L, Kinra S, Bharathi AV, Prabhakaran D, Reddy
(1)South Asia Network of Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India,
Building 47, Sector 44 Gurgaon, New Delhi, Haryana 122002, India.
g.krithiga@phfi.org.
BACKGROUND: The cardiovascular and other health benefits and potential harms of
protein and micronutrient deficiency of vegetarian diets continue to be debated.
METHODS: Study participants included urban migrants, their rural siblings and
urban residents (n = 6555, mean age - 40.9 yrs) of the Indian Migration Study
from Lucknow, Nagpur, Hyderabad and Bangalore. Information on diet (validated
interviewer-administered semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire),
tobacco, alcohol, physical activity, medical histories, as well as blood
pressure, fasting blood and anthropometric measurements were collected. Nutrient
databases were used to calculate nutrient content of regional recipes.
Vegetarians ate no eggs, fish, poultry and meat. Using multivariate linear
regression with robust standard error model, we compared the macro- and
micro-nutrient profile of vegetarian and non-vegetarian diets.
RESULTS: Vegetarians, (32.8% of the population), consumed greater amounts of
legumes, vegetables, roots and tubers, dairy and sugar, while non-vegetarians
had a greater intake of cereals, fruits, spices, salt (p < 0.01), fats and oils.
Vegetarians had a higher socioeconomic status, and were less likely to smoke,
drink alcohol (p < 0.0001) and engage in less physical activity (p = 0.04). On
multivariate analysis, vegetarians consumed more carbohydrates (β = 7.0 g/day
(95% CI: 9.9 to 4.0), p < 0.0001), vitamin C (β = 8.7 mg/day (95% CI: 4.3
to13.0), p < 0.0001) and folate (β = 8.0 mcg/day (95% CI: 3.3 to 12.7),
p = 0.001) and lower levels of fat (β = -1.6 g/day (95% CI: -0.62 to -2.7),
p = 0.002), protein (β = -6.4 g/day (95% CI: -5.8 to -7.0), p < 0.0001), vitamin
B12 (β = -1.4 mcg/day (95% CI: -1.2 to -1.5), p < 0.0001) and zinc
(β = -0.6 mg/day (95% CI: -0.4 to -0.7), p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: Overall, Indian vegetarian diets were found to be adequate to
sustain nutritional demands according to recommended dietary allowances with
less fat. Lower vitamin B12 bio-availability remains a concern and requires
exploration of acceptable dietary sources for vegetarians.
PMID: 24899080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
5. Ecol Food Nutr. 2017 Sep-Oct;56(5):351-363. doi:
10.1080/03670244.2017.1337570.  Epub 2017 Sep 11.
Lacto-Vegetarian Diet and Correlation of Fasting Blood Sugar with Lipids in
Population Practicing Sedentary Lifestyle.
Praharaj AB(1), Goenka RK(2), Dixit S(1), Gupta MK(1), Kar SK(1), Negi S(3).
(1)a Regional Medical Research Centre (ICMR), Chandrasekharpur , Bhubaneswar ,
(2)b Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences , Bhubaneswar , Odisha , India.
(3)c National Institute of Pathology (ICMR) , New Delhi , India.
Rising burden of diabetes in India requires quick intervention that integrates
policies and programs for effective prevention and control of disease. This
retrospective cross-sectional study was conducted to observe effect of diet in
two Indian communities practicing sedentary lifestyle. Fasting blood samples
were analyzed for blood sugar, glycated-hemoglobin (HbA1C), and lipid profile.
Body mass index (BMI) and waist circumference (WC) measurements were recorded.
Diabetes incidence was lower in lacto-vegetarian (1.7%) than in non-vegetarian
group (5.3%) despite similar lipid profiles and BMI/WC between the groups.
Fasting blood sugar (FBS) was positively correlated with LDL and VLDL levels and
negatively correlated with HDL, only in lacto-vegetarian group. Study suggests:
(1) Indian lacto-vegetarian diet has beneficial effects on diabetes incidence
irrespective of high body weight and sedentary lifestyle; (2) intervention to
reduce body lipids, such as lipid-lowering drugs and exercise, may have greater
effect in reducing FBS levels in this lacto-vegetarian group.
PMID: 28891681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
6. Food Res Int. 2023 Feb;164:112318. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2022.112318. Epub
Filamentous fungi for sustainable vegan food production systems within a
circular economy: Present status and future prospects.
Awasthi MK(1), Kumar V(2), Hellwig C(3), Wikandari R(4), Harirchi S(3), Sar
T(3), Wainaina S(3), Sindhu R(5), Binod P(6), Zhang Z(7), Taherzadeh MJ(3).
(1)College of Natural Resources and Environment, Northwest A&F University,
Yangling, Shaanxi Province 712100, China. Electronic address:
mukesh_awasthi45@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Community Medicine, Saveetha Medical College, Saveetha
Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences (SIMATS), Thandalam 602105, India.
(3)Swedish Centre for Resource Recovery, University of Borås, Borås 50190,
(4)Department of Food and Agricultural Product Technology, Faculty of
Agricultural Technology, Gadjah Mada University, Jalan Flora, Bulaksumur,
Yogyakarta 55281, Indonesia.
(5)Department of Food Technology, TKM Institute of Technology, Kollam 691 505,
(6)Microbial Processes and Technology Division, CSIR-National Institute for
Interdisciplinary Science and Technology (CSIR-NIIST), Trivandrum 695 019,
(7)College of Natural Resources and Environment, Northwest A&F University,
Yangling, Shaanxi Province 712100, China.
Filamentous fungi serve as potential candidates in the production of different
value-added products. In the context of food, there are several advantages of
using filamentous fungi for food. Among the main advantages is that the fungal
biomass used food not only meets basic nutritional requirements but that it is
also rich in protein, low in fat, and free of cholesterol. This speaks to the
potential of filamentous fungi in the production of food that can substitute
animal-derived protein sources such as meat. Moreover, life-cycle analyses and
techno-economic analyses reveal that fungal proteins perform better than
animal-derived proteins in terms of land use efficiency as well as global
warming. The present article provides an overview of the potential of
filamentous fungi as a source of food and food supplements. The
commercialization potential as well as social, legal and safety issues of
fungi-based food products are discussed.
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2022.112318
PMID: 36737911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
7. Perit Dial Int. 2001;21 Suppl 3:S322-5.
Vegetarianism in India.
(1)Tamil Nad Hospital, Devaki Hospital Ltd., Chennai, India.
jayanthyjoel@yahoo.com
PMID: 11887845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
8. J Nutr. 2020 Oct 12;150(10):2748-2754. doi: 10.1093/jn/nxaa235.
Metabolic Availability of Lysine in Milk and a Vegetarian Cereal-Legume Meal
Determined by the Indicator Amino Acid Oxidation Method in Indian Men.
Bandyopadhyay S(1), Kuriyan R(1), Shivakumar N(1), Ghosh S(2), Ananthan R(3),
Devi S(1), Kurpad AV(4).
(1)Division of Nutrition, St. John's Research Institute, Research Center of
University of Mysore, St. John's National Academy of Health Sciences, Bengaluru,
(2)Department of Biostatistics, St. John's Medical College, St. John's National
Academy of Health Sciences, Bengaluru, India.
(3)Food Chemistry Division, ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition, Jamai-Osmania,
(4)Department of Physiology, St. John's Medical College, St. John's National
Academy of Health Sciences, Bengaluru, India.
BACKGROUND: Lysine rich foods such as milk and legumes serve as important food
additions to the lysine deficient cereal-based diets of vegetarian populations
in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) to alleviate the risk of quality
corrected dietary protein inadequacy. Dietary protein quality can be determined
by estimating the metabolic availability (MA) of lysine.
OBJECTIVES: The study aimed to estimate the MA of lysine in spray-dried cow milk
powder (SMP), heat-treated spray-dried cow milk powder (HSMP), and a habitually
consumed cereal-legume based vegetarian meal (VM), using the indicator amino
acid oxidation (IAAO) slope-ratio method.
METHODS: The MA of lysine in SMP, HSMP, and VM was estimated in 7 healthy young
men aged 19-24 y with BMI of 21.5 ± 0.5 kg/m2 in a repeated measures design. The
IAAO response slopes with 2 graded lysine intakes (10.5 and 15.0 mg·kg-1·d-1)
from the SMP and VM were compared with the response slope generated with 3
graded crystalline lysine intakes (6.0, 10.5, and 15.0 mg·kg-1·d-1) at the
subrequirement level. To produce HSMP, pasteurized cow milk was heat treated and
spray dried. The MA of lysine in HSMP was tested at a single level of lysine
intake (15 mg·kg-1·d-1). A total of 8 IAAO experiments were conducted on each
participant in randomized order. The IAAO slopes were estimated using a linear
mixed-effect regression model.
RESULTS: The MA of lysine in SMP, HSMP, and VM was 91.9%, 69.9%, and 86.6%
CONCLUSIONS: Heat treatment reduced the MA of lysine by 22% in HSMP compared
with SMP in healthy Indian adults. The lysine MA estimates can be used to
optimize lysine limited cereal-based diets, with the addition of appropriately
processed legumes and milk powder, to meet the protein requirement. This trial
was registered at Clinical Trials Registry of India (http://ctri.nic.in) as
Copyright © The Author(s) on behalf of the American Society for Nutrition 2020.
DOI: 10.1093/jn/nxaa235
PMID: 32840572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ginger, a versatile and aromatic spice, has been an integral part of global cuisine and traditional medicine for centuries. Whether used for its bold flavour, culinary prowess, or medicinal properties, ginger remains a cherished ingredient in various forms. There are two primary variations of ginger - dry and fresh which offer distinct attributes when it comes to usage, nutrition, and health benefits. Here is all you need to find out about these two varieties, that can help you make informed choices.
When it comes to nutrition, fresh ginger boasts a range of health benefits attributed to its natural form and the presence of active compounds like gingerol. It helps in digestion while reducing nausea, bloating, and indigestion. Fresh ginger also has anti-inflammatory properties that may alleviate symptoms of arthritis and reduce muscle pain. It is rich in antioxidants and vitamin C, and can boost the immune system. It is commonly used to alleviate morning sickness during pregnancy.
While the drying process can cause a slight loss in some nutrients, dry ginger retains many beneficial properties and it may help in providing relief from inflammatory conditions like osteoarthritis. Dry ginger's concentrated compounds can help combat infections and inhibit the growth of harmful bacteria. Some studies suggest that dry ginger may help lower blood sugar levels. Similar to fresh ginger, dry ginger can help alleviate nausea and motion sickness.
While fresh and dry ginger each offer unique flavours and they have their unique applications in the culinary world, they differ a lot nutritionally. Both forms of ginger cater to a variety of needs and the choice between fresh and dry ginger depends on your culinary preferences and the specific dish you're preparing. Whether you prefer the bold and zesty profile of fresh ginger or the convenience and versatility of dry ginger powder, there's no denying that ginger, in any form, is a spice worth including in your daily repertoire for both its flavour and potential health perks.
Uses of dry gingerIt is often used in cooking items with a longer shelf life. From laddoos, pinnis to mathris, use of dry ginger in the form of powder gives the perfect taste and aroma without disturbing the shelf life of the food items. Also, in case you are running short of fresh ginger at home, you can use dry ginger as the perfect alternative. The powder can also be used for Ginger Baths. All you need to do is, mix 1 tablespoon of dry ginger powder and mix it with an equal amount of baking soda. Rub it gently on the body for cleaning and see the magic.
- Diet plays a critical role in shaping the health and well-being of both individuals and populations, and unhealthy diets are a major risk factor for disease and disability.
- Healthy diets help to protect against malnutrition in all its forms, as well as noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), including diabetes, heart disease, stroke and cancer.
- Healthy dietary practices start early in life – breastfeeding fosters healthy growth and improves cognitive development.
- Dietary behaviours and preferences established in childhood and adolescence often extend into adulthood.
- Healthy diets come in many forms, but the four core principles of adequacy, balance, moderation and diversity should be the foundation of any healthy diet.
- A diet must also be safe to be healthy, i.e. free from microbial and chemical contaminants.
- A variety of minimally processed and unprocessed foods low in unhealthy fats, free sugars and sodium are the foundation of any healthy diet.
Consuming a healthy diet throughout the life-course helps to prevent malnutrition in all its forms as well as a range of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) and conditions.
However, change in food production and food systems, rapid urbanization and changing lifestyles have led to a shift in dietary patterns. People are now consuming more highly processed foods high in unhealthy fats, free sugars and salt/sodium, and many people do not eat enough fruit and vegetables or consume sufficient dietary fibre.
The exact make-up of a diversified, balanced and healthy diet will vary depending on individual characteristics (e.g. age, gender, lifestyle and degree of physical activity), cultural context, locally-available foods and dietary customs.
However, the basic principles of what constitutes a healthy diet remain the same and are described in four principles:
- adequacy: meets, without exceeding, micronutrient and macronutrient needs such that deficiencies are prevented;
- balance: total energy intake is balanced with energy expenditure, with an adequate balance across the three primary sources of energy, protein, fats and carbohydrates;
- moderation: limited intake of nutrients, ingredients, and foods that may be detrimental to health;
- diversity: inclusion of a wide variety of nutritious foods within and across food groups.
Diets embracing these four core principles promote health throughout the life course.
Carbohydrates provide the primary energy source for the body. The amount of carbohydrate in the diet can vary and although low and very low carbohydrate diets are used to treat certain conditions, for most people a variety of unrefined carbohydrates should represent a significant portion of the diet, approximately 45–75% of total daily energy.
- Carbohydrates in the diet should come primarily from whole grains, vegetables, fruits and pulses. Examples of whole grains include unprocessed maize, millet, oats, wheat and brown rice. Examples of pulses include lentils, chickpeas, beans, and dried peas.
- Fresh fruit and vegetables are great choices but frozen and canned are also good, provided they don’t have added sugars or excess sodium. While fruit juice can be consumed, most varieties including those without added sugars contain significant amounts of free sugars, the consumption of which should be limited.
- Everyone older than 10 years of age should aim for at least 400 grams of fruits and vegetables per day, with lesser amounts for children under 10: at least 250 or 350 grams for children 2–5 or 6–9 years of age, respectively.
Everyone older than 10 years of age should also aim for a daily intake of at least 25 grams of naturally-occurring dietary fibre as found in foods, with lesser amounts for children under 10: at least 15 or 21 grams for children 2–5 or 6–9 years of age, respectively.
- The consumption of free sugars should be limited to less than 10% of total daily energy intake, which is equivalent to 50 g (or about 12 level teaspoons) for a person of healthy body weight consuming about 2000 calories per day. Limiting further to 5% or less of total daily energy intake may provide additional health benefits.
- Consumption of free sugars should be limited throughout the life course. Free sugars include monosaccharides and disaccharides (e.g. sucrose, fructose, glucose) added to foods and beverages by the manufacturer, cook or consumer, and sugars naturally present in honey, syrups, fruit juices and fruit juice concentrates.
- Reducing consumption of free sugars (and maintaining low levels of intake) should be accomplished without the use of non-sugar sweeteners. Examples of common non-sugar sweeteners include acesulfame K, aspartame, advantame, cyclamates, neotame, saccharin, sucralose, stevia and stevia derivatives.
Fat is an essential nutrient for proper functioning of cells in the body, and two fatty acids – linoleic acid and α-linolenic acid – can only be obtained from the diet. Therefore, in adults, a minimum of 15% of the energy consumed per day should be from fat, up to 30% of total daily calories or more as described below.
- For adults, limiting the amount of total fat in the diet to 30% or less of total daily energy intake may help to prevent unhealthy weight gain in the adult population. Children have unique energy requirements for optimal growth and development throughout childhood and adolescence and therefore higher total fat intakes may also be acceptable.
- No more than 10% of total energy intake should come from saturated fat and no more than 1% of total energy from trans fat of any type. Lower intakes of saturated and trans fat may have additional health benefits. Saturated and trans fat can be replaced with polyunsaturated fat or monounsaturated fat from plant sources. Saturated fat can also be replaced by carbohydrates from foods containing naturally-occurring dietary fibre, such as whole grains, fruits, vegetables and pulses. In particular, industrially-produced trans fats are not part of a healthy diet and should be avoided.
Proteins provide the building blocks for many of the structural elements of the body, such as muscle, as well as functional molecules such as hormones and enzymes. Protein intake at 10–15% of total daily energy intake is generally sufficient to meet the needs of adults (approximately 50–75 grams for a person of healthy body weight consuming about 2000 calories per day).
- Protein intake may be greater than 15% of total daily energy intake during adolescence, and for athletes, body builders and others actively building and/or maintaining significant amounts of muscle mass. Consuming excessive amounts of protein, however, can place a metabolic burden on the body, particularly the kidneys.
- Protein can come from a mix of animal and plant sources. Protein digestibility and quality should also be considered, particularly in childhood and adolescence. In some contexts, switching to more plant-based sources of protein may be preferable to decrease risk of diet-related noncommunicable diseases in adults. In other contexts, consumption of animal source foods is still important to favour nutrient intakes, particularly in children and pregnant/lactating women.
Sodium and potassium are essential minerals but high intake of sodium (salt) is associated with increased blood pressure which can lead to cardiovascular disease. Salt intake is high in many parts of the world and people are often unaware of the amount of salt they consume. Potassium can mitigate the negative effects of elevated sodium consumption on blood pressure.
- In many countries, most salt comes from processed foods (e.g. ready meals; processed meats such as bacon, ham and salami; cheese; and salty snacks) or from foods consumed frequently in large amounts (e.g. bread). Salt is also added to foods during cooking (e.g. bouillon, stock cubes, soy sauce and fish sauce) or at the point of consumption (e.g. table salt).
- In adults, salt intake should be limited to less than 5 grams per day (2 grams per day sodium). For children the maximum amount of sodium is less and needs to be estimated based on energy intake.
- Salt intake can be reduced by limiting the amount of salt and high-sodium condiments (e.g. soy sauce, fish sauce and bouillon) when cooking and preparing foods; not having salt or high-sodium sauces on the table; limiting the consumption of salty snacks; and choosing products with lower sodium content.
- A potassium intake of at least 90 mmol/day (3510 mg/day) for adults may be beneficial. For children the amount of potassium is less and needs to be estimated based on energy intake. Intake of potassium can be increased by consuming fresh fruit and vegetables.
- Lower-sodium salt substitutes (LSSS), in which a proportion of the sodium is typically replaced with potassium, are alternatives to regular table salt.. These products can contribute to reducing sodium intake in people not at risk of hyperkalaemia (elevated potassium levels in the blood), especially in populations where discretionary salt is a major source of sodium intake and can therefore help reduce cardiovascular disease through both lower sodium intake and higher potassium intake. WHO recommends this intervention for settings where health systems have the capacity to detect promptly and manage potential cases of kidney disease.
Vitamins and minerals (micronutrients)
Micronutrients are essential vitamins and minerals – there are about 30 in total, including 13 vitamins (such as A, B-complex, C, D, E, and K) and 16 minerals (like iron, iodine, zinc, and calcium) – that the body needs in small amounts for proper growth and health. Deficiencies in these nutrients can lead to serious health issues, from anaemia and scurvy to cognitive impairment and neural tube defects. Globally, micronutrient deficiencies are highly prevalent: more than half of children under five and over two‑thirds of non‑pregnant women of reproductive age are deficient in at least one key micronutrient (typically iron, zinc, vitamin A, or folate).
- Encourage a diet with a wide variety of nutrient‑dense foods, including fruits, vegetables, whole grains, legumes, nuts, seeds, and lean animal‑source foods, to ensure adequate intake of key vitamins and minerals.
- Promote the consumption of micronutrient‑rich foods regularly – for example, beans or lean meats to support iron intake; dark‑green leafy vegetables to improve vitamin A status; or iodized salt to avoid iodine deficiency.
- In countries where micronutrient deficiencies are highly prevalent (20% or higher), integrate large‑scale food fortification into national public health strategies by fortifying widely-consumed staples and condiments – such as flour, rice, oil, salt, or sugar – with key micronutrients (e.g., iron, folic acid, vitamin A, iodine, and zinc).
A wide variety of foods, including a variety of fruits, vegetables, pulses, wholegrains and lean sources of protein, help ensure a healthy diet. Diverse diets, based on a wide variety of foods, between and within food groups, are associated with a greater likelihood of meeting vitamin and mineral requirements and reduced risk of diet-related noncommunicable diseases. For many adults, a shift towards more plant-based sources of protein may bring health benefits, particularly when the shift is away from red meat. Foods high in unhealthy fats, free sugars and sodium should be limited.
Additionally, diets containing significant amounts of highly processed foods, which are often high in sodium, sugar or unhealthy fats, are associated with negative health outcomes.
In the first 2 years of a child’s life, optimal nutrition fosters healthy growth and improves cognitive development. It also reduces the risk of becoming overweight or obese and developing NCDs later in life.
Advice on a healthy diet for infants and children is similar to that for adults, but the following elements are also important:
- infants should be breastfed exclusively during the first 6 months of life;
- infants should be breastfed continuously until 2 years of age and beyond;
- from 6 months of age, breast milk should be complemented with a variety of adequate, safe and nutrient-dense foods. Salt and sugars should not be added to complementary foods;
- infants and young children of 6–23 months of age should consume a diverse diet that includes animal source foods, such as meat, fish, or eggs, as well as fruits and vegetables;
- consumption of starchy staple foods should be minimized; and
- foods high in sugar, salt and trans fats as well as sweet beverages should be avoided.
Diet evolves over time, being influenced by many social and economic factors that interact in a complex manner to shape individual dietary patterns. These factors include income, food prices (which will affect the availability and affordability of healthy foods), individual preferences and beliefs, cultural traditions, and geographical and environmental aspects (including climate change). Therefore, creating a healthy food environment – that promotes a diversified, balanced and healthy diet – requires the involvement of multiple sectors and stakeholders, including government, and the public and private sectors.
Governments have a central role in creating a healthy food environment that enables people to adopt and maintain healthy dietary practices. Evidence-based, cost-effective and other recommended actions by policy-makers to create a healthy food environment include the following:
- creating coherence in national policies and investment plans – including health, food and agricultural, education, fiscal and trade policies – to promote a healthy diet and protect public health through:
- increasing incentives (e.g. through subsidies) for producers and retailers to grow, use and sell fresh fruit and vegetables;
- establishing taxes and reducing incentives for the food industry to decrease production of processed foods containing high levels of saturated fat, trans fat, free sugars and salt/sodium;
- encouraging reformulation of food products to reduce the contents of saturated fat, trans fat, free sugars and salt/sodium, with the goal of eliminating industrially-produced trans fat;
- implementing mandatory instruments to protect children from the harmful impact of food marketing;
- establishing standards to foster healthy dietary practices through ensuring the availability of healthy, nutritious, safe and affordable foods in pre-schools, schools, other public institutions and the workplace; and
- encouraging transnational, national and local food services and catering outlets to improve the nutritional quality of their foods – ensuring the availability and affordability of healthy options – and to review portion sizes and pricing;
- encouraging consumer demand for healthy foods and meals through:
- promoting consumer awareness of a healthy diet;
- developing school policies and programmes that encourage and enable children to adopt and maintain a healthy diet;
- nudging interventions that deliberately adjust the choice architecture and the context within which consumers make dietary decisions, including how options are presented, placed and priced;
- educating children, adolescents and adults about nutrition and healthy dietary practices;
- encouraging culinary skills, including in children through schools;
- supporting point-of-sale information, including through nutrition labelling that ensures accurate, standardized and comprehensible information on nutrient contents in foods (in line with the Codex Alimentarius Commission guidelines);
- implementing interpretive front-of-pack labelling to facilitate consumer understanding; and
- providing nutrition and dietary counselling at primary health-care facilities;
- promoting appropriate infant and young child feeding practices through:
- implementing the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes and subsequent relevant World Health Assembly resolutions;
- implementing policies and practices to promote protection of working mothers;
- ensuring access to quality counselling on infant and young child feeding during pregnancy and the first two years of life; and
- promoting, protecting and supporting breastfeeding in health services and the community, including through the Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative.
WHO’s work to improve diets and nutrition is rooted in mandates from its Member States through resolutions of the World Health Assembly (WHA) and the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). Momentum started with the WHO Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health in 2004, which called for coordinated action across governments, civil society, the private sector and WHO to promote healthy diets and physical activity.
Over time, further resolutions, including the Comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant and young child nutrition and its global targets, have shaped WHO’s work around three core areas:
- protecting people from harmful dietary components and commercial practices; and
- multisectoral action across systems.
Together, these resolutions require WHO to support all countries in ensuring that everyone, everywhere, can access healthy, safe and affordable diets throughout life.
1. Building the evidence: guidelines, standards and tools
To fulfil these mandates, WHO turns nutrition science into practical, evidence‑based guidance. WHO has produced more than 15 guidelines over the last decade, including recommendations on reducing salt, sugars and unhealthy fats; eliminating industrially produced trans fats; improving complementary feeding; and supporting breastfeeding, among others.
2. Supporting action: turning evidence into impact
WHO supports countries in implementing these policies through multiple initiatives. The REPLACE action package offers a roadmap to eliminate industrial trans fats and has already helped protect more than 50% of the global population. WHO also co‑leads major global efforts – including the Global Action Plan on Child Wasting, the Framework to Accelerate Anaemia Reduction and the Acceleration Plan to Stop Obesity – to support countries in developing national roadmaps and strengthening primary health‑care services
3. Monitoring progress: data for accountability
WHO collaborates with FAO, UNICEF and academic partners to strengthen global monitoring of dietary patterns and food‑policy implementation. WHO uses low‑burden tools and standardized metrics to assess dietary intake at population level, enabling more frequent and comparable data collection . WHO also maintains the Global Database for Food and Nutrition Actions (GIFNA), which tracks more than 3100 food and nutrition policies worldwide, helping monitor progress and identify policy gaps.
