SOURCE: NIN
URL: https://www.nin.res.in/researchhighlights/2005-06.pdf
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

In its relentless efforts, the National Institute of in the affected islands, to assess their nutritional
Nutrition (NIN) continued its research in different status. A total of 2513 individuals from 28 relief
thrust areas pertaining to human nutrition and camps established in nine Islands for Tsunami
health. As the life expectancy is increasing the affected population in Andaman and Nicobar Islands
prevalence of degenerative diseases is also on the were covered in the survey.
rise. Keeping this in view, National Nutrition
The levels of consumption of various food groups Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) carried out surveys on observed in the current survey were, however, the prevalence of degenerative diseases and the better than those reported for their rural dietary intake of the population in different states of counterparts of mainland except other vegetables, the country. During this year under the Country milk & milk products, the intake of which was low.  Investment Plan, technology transfer for the The median intake of various nutrients (per CU/day) development of micronutrient-fortified foods to the by the households barring proteins was less than State Government enterprise was given priority. In the RDA. The data revealed that the extent of addition, technical assistance was also provided to undernutrition among preschool children in the
the AP State Civil supplies department to fortify and relief camps of Andaman and Nicobar Islands was
supply wheat flour to the community through Public significantly lower than that reported for their rural
Distribution System. Emphasis was given to other counter parts of mainland. The girls were
priority areas like tribal nutrition, beneficial effects of nutritionally at a disadvantage as compared to boys
antioxidants in human health and also as stablilizing among both the Settlers and Nicobarese. The adult
agents in edible vegetable oils. In addition, there is a Nicobarese were better in their nutritional status as
paradigm shift in the nutrition research related to compared to the settlers.
degenerative diseases. Fostering this vision, NIN has
taken up new approaches in identifying molecular
basis of degenerative diseases such as link of          a-
Crystallin between diabetes and cataract and role of
As a part of the survey on “Prevalence of resistin in diabetes. A series of studies on dietary
micronutrient deficiencies” Vitamin A deficiency fats, micronutrients, women's health, food safety
(VAD) was investigated among the vulnerable and health benefits of ginger were also carried out.
groups of rural population in the States of Andhra The role of NSS volunteers as change agents in Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, nutrition education in the community was studied.  Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. Here are the highlights of the research carried out Out of the total of 71,591 preschool children from during the year. 633 villages 3,934 samples were analyzed for blood
Vitamin A levels using Dry Blood Spot (DBS)
technique to assess the sub-clinical Vitamin A
The result suggest that about 62% (CI: 60.3,
63.3) of children in general, had blood vitamin A
levels of <20 mg/dL, indicative of high prevalence of
A rapid survey was carried out during the sub-clinical vitamin A deficiency. The proportion
months of April/May 2005, to assess the health ranged from a high of about 88% in Madhya
and nutritional status of Tsunami affected population Pradesh, through 79% in Kerala to about 50-60% in
living in the relief camps. In addition, a survey was the remaining States. The prevalence of sub-clinical
carried out in the two hostels (one each for boys and VAD (<20 mg/dL) was significantly (p<0.05) higher  th th
girls) in students studying in 10  and 12  standards  among 3-5 year children (63.1%, CI: 61.2, 65.0)
1.2 Prevalence of Vitamin A deficiency (VAD)
among  preschool children of  rural  India
1.1 Health and nutrition status of Tsunami
affected population living in the relief
compared to 1-3 year children (59.6%, CI: 57.1, in women and ranged from a low of 36.7% in the
62.1), with no significant gender differentials (Boys: State of Maharashtra to a high 91.8% in Kerala.
The prevalence was relatively higher (66.7%) The overall prevalence of hypertension (SBP  among children who did not receive massive dose of >140 and/or DBP  >90mm of Hg) was about 25%. vitamin A during the past 12 months, compared to No gender differentials were observed in the those who received either one (61.6%) or two doses prevalence of hypertension. The prevalence tended (56.3%). In the State of Kerala, where the to increase with age, from 13.6% in 20-30 years prevalence of sub-clinical VAD was highest (79.4%), group to 56.4% in >80 years age group. About 60-the proportion of children with dietary intake of 67% of the adults were aware of hypertension, while vitamin A in amounts of <50% RDA was also high 2-3% were currently on treatment. The prevalence (91.8%) and that of coverage for massive dose of of hypertension was high among the adults, who vitamin A was least (38.5%), compared to the were suffering from overweight/obesity (48%) remaining states surveyed. compared to normals (26%).
The study revealed that the magnitude of Diabetes  mellitus
prevalence of sub-clinical vitamin A deficiency was
Estimation of fasting blood glucose among quite high in all the States including those states
adults was carried out only in the State of Andhra where the prevalence of clinical deficiency signs
Pradesh. The prevalence of diabetes mellitus (FBS were either absent or very low. Therefore, there is a
levels of >126 mg%) was about 4% among adult need to strengthen all the components of the
men, and about 3% among women. The proportion National Programme for Prevention of Nutritional
of impaired fasting glucose FBS levels of 110 to 126 Blindness in the country.
mg% was about 2% each among men and women.
About 48-56% were aware of diabetes mellitus, and
About one third of adult men were currently
smoking, out of them three fourths were smoking
since more than 10 years. The prevalence of diabetes In view of increasing problems of diet related mellitus was high among adult men and women who chronic diseases such as obesity, hypertension, etc were overweight/obese (9%) compared to normals a survey was carried out to assess the  prevalence (2-4%).of obesity, hypertension among adult men and
women (>20 years). The prevalence of diabetes
mellitus (DM)/ hyperglycemia was assessed in the
State of Andhra Pradesh on a pilot basis. Estimation
of haemoglobin was also carried out among adult
men and NPNL women. A 24hr. dietary recall survey
was also carried out to assess the food and nutrient A special survey was carried out to assess the
intake of all the individuals, in every alternate HH health and nutritional status of the tribal population in
(covered for socio-demographic information). the project area. The district has a total tribal
population of about 4.5 lakhs, mainly constituted by Obesity Koyas, Lambadas/Sugalis, and Kondareddis.  The
The overall prevalence of abdominal obesity in study revealed high rate of adult illiteracy, poor
terms of waist circumference (>102 cms) was about economic status, dependency on agriculture and allied
1% among men, while it was 7% among women  occupations for livelihood, low intake of protective
(>88 cms). The prevalence of abdominal obesity in foods and gross inadequacy in the intake of
terms of waist hip ratio (WHR) was 25% and ranged micronutrients. The overall prevalence of
from as low as 10.1% in Madhya Pradesh to a high of undernutrition, though low compared to their tribal
40.5% in the State of Kerala among men. It was 69% counterparts of the State, it was however, higher than
1.3 Assessment of diet and nutritional status of
individuals and prevalence of hypertension in
1.4 Nutritional status of tribal population in ITDA
their rural counterparts. The prevalence of The results revealed that height and weight of
morbidities such as fever and diarrhoea was also mothers were associated with birth outcome,
relatively higher compared to that reported in rural histologic chorioamnionitis was significantly associated
areas, indicating the problem of poor environmental with linear growth of babies. In addition to nutritional
sanitation and personal hygiene. The coverage of factors, other factors such as inflammatory response
beneficiaries for immunization and supplementation of due to genital tract infections might play an equally
massive dose vitamin A and IFA tablets was relatively important role in adverse birth outcome.
good. Poverty and poor health seeking behaviour
probably contributed to aggravate the situation.
A study was carried out to assess and compare
the placental morphology by measuring the villous
structure and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and placental growth factor (PLGF) Undernutrition continues to be a major public
expression from conception at 7-10 weeks of health problem in India, affecting a large section of
gestation, of low socio-economic status (LSES) and the communities, the most vulnerable being young
high socio-economic status (HSES) groups, in children and women of reproductive age groups.  . In
relation to their nutritional status. The study addition to the existing mid day meal (MDM)
indicated the significant disparity in placental programme, the Commissioner of Civil Supplies,
structure  between the undernourished and well Government of Andhra Pradesh proposed to
nourished at a comparable gestational period and is supplement micronutrient fortified millet based
suggestive of a predominant hypoxemic placental biscuits as snacks to the primary school children.
development in these LSES women under the stress The biscuits were fortified with ragi/maize/jowar in
of undernutrition.levels, so as to provide 50% of the recommended
allowances per day/child, by consumption of three
biscuits with a total weight of 24 g. Sensory
evaluation of the fortified biscuits was evaluated. All
A. Micronutrients the three varieties of biscuits viz. jowar, maize and
ragi based ones were found to be equally good.
micronutrient-fortified biscuits among primary
school children, about 90% of the children gave a The National facility for Dried Blood Spot (DBS)
score of 'good' to 'very good' for all the Technology for vitamin A estimation established at
characteristics studied viz. appearance, colour, the Institute is operational since March 2004.
texture, flavour and taste with respect to all the
three types of micronutrient fortified biscuits. There was a good agreement between the DBS
and plasma retinol analyzed at the facility at various
time points and that analyzed at the Croft
Technologies after a period of one year. Thus the
performance of NIN DBS facility has been externally
There has been extensive research on maternal
infection and pregnancy outcomes in developed
countries, relatively, little is known in the under-
privileged poor communities of India, where the
problem of infections is much greater. Association of One of the main causes of iron deficiency
IUGR and PTD with histological chorioamnionitis and anaemia is low dietary bioavailability of iron. It is,
local cytokine (IL8, TNFa) response was determined. generally, accepted that iron and zinc deficiencies
2.2. Maternal nutrition in early pregnancy
1.5 Acceptability of micronutrient fortified millet
based biscuits-A study among primary school
3.1 External validation of the National Facility for
Dried Blood Spot Technology for Vitamin A
2.1 Obstetric outcome and proinflammatory
3.2 Iron and zinc bioavailability of represen-
distribution and availability of iron and zinc
frequently occur together because the dietary Radical Scavenging Activity (RSA) of Soyabean oil
factors that impair iron absorption also affect zinc (SBO) or Sunflower oil (SFO) due to addition of lignans
absorption. There are no RDAs for zinc in India. may possibly be due to synergism among sesame
Therefore, it is important to obtain regional data on lignans and non-glyceride components of SBO (soya
dietary intake and food composition and to measure lignans, isoflavanoids) or SFO (phytosterols).
iron and zinc absorption from several days of dietary
There are regional, rural and urban differences
in iron and zinc density and their in vitro availability,
Long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-which are mainly due to the composition of major
PUFA) of both n-6 and n-3 series are integral staple and phytate content in the diet. Modification of
components of cell membrane and are important diet to improve iron and zinc availability can be
determinants of fetal growth and development. achieved by replacing major staple either by
Studies on the effects of n-3 PUFA on fetal improving iron content and/or minimizing inhibitor
programming of biochemical and molecular phytate. Ironically good sources of minerals are also
parameters associated with insulin resistance good in phytates and the intake of absorption
suggests that maternal intake of Trans fatty acids promoters such as fish, meat and ascorbic acid is
(TFA) (from hydrogenated vegetable oils) may very low.
increase the susceptibility to biochemical/metabolic
alterations known to be associated with increase in
B. Food fortification risk of chronic diseases.
ELOVL4 is a novel member of family of human
fatty acid elongases involved in long chain fatty acids
and whose function is essential for photoreceptor
maintenance. These observations suggest that
As part of the Pubic Private Partnership and ELOVL4 expression may be related to n-3 PUFA
under Country Investment Plan, the technology of nutritional status. Further, the decrease in retinal
fortification of whole wheat flour (atta) with ELOVL4 expression associated with abnormality in
micronutrients developed by NIN has been retinal morphology in TFA fed groups suggests that
translated to fortify and supply wheat flour through TFA may affect retinal function and metabolism of
fair price shop in the state of Andhra Pradesh on a long chain PUFA.
pilot scale by the AP State Civil Supplies Department,
Government of Andhra Pradesh. The fortified atta D. Antioxidants
branded 'VIJAYA ENRICHED ATTA' provides iron - 60
mg, folic acid - 1.5 mg and vitamin A  3300 IU per kg
Phenolic compounds present in fruits and
vegetables are reported to have multiple biological
effects including antioxidant activity (AOA). The
phenolic content and antioxidant activity of some
Sesame (Sesamum Indicum Unn) has long been commonly consumed plant foods and some
used as a traditional health food in India for its preliminary data on the antioxidant activity of a few
nutritional and medicinal value. Sesame contains fresh fruits as natural sources of antioxidants has
substantial amounts of unique components, namely been generated. Dry fruits are rich in antioxidant
sesamin and sesamolin. The higher stability of activity and phenolic compounds appear to be
sesame oil has been attributed to its inherent significant contributors to their antioxidant activity.
lignans. The effect of sesamin and sesamolin in Consumption of dry fruits may therefore augment
enhancing the stability of edible vegetable oils was the antioxidant status and protect against chronic
evaluated. The increase in antioxidant potential and diseases.
3.5 Role of n-3 PUFA in foetal programming of
insulin resistance in offspring: Biochemical
3.3 Fortification of whole wheat flour (atta) with
micronutrients iron, folic acid and vitamin A -
3.6Health beneficial effects of fruits and
3.4 Effect of sesame lignans on the oxidative
3.7Development of antioxidant rich recipes
3.8 Diabetic cataract and chaperone function of
4.1 Development of communication strategies
3.9.Transcriptional analysis of resistin and
identification of cis - and trans acting factors
The adipocytokine resistin, a member of a family
of cysteine-rich proteins known as resistin-like
molecules (RELM) is also shown to be involved in
Phenolic compounds are the potent ubiquitous inflammatory processes. Previous studies have
antioxidant substances present in plant foods. An however highlighted that resistin impairs glucose
attempt was made to generate the data base on the tolerance and insulin action in mice. In addition,
antioxidant activity (AOA) and phenolic content (PC) resistin also inhibits adipogenesis in murine 3T3-L1
of plant foods commonly consumed by the Indian cells. In order to further evaluate the role of these
population and assess the effects of different types transcription factors in the expression of human
of domestic processing on these parameters. It also resistin, an electrophoretic mobility shift assay was
involves formulating AOA rich recipes based on the performed wherein the binding of AP-1, C/EBP and
data generated and assessing the effect of the c-Rel to their respective cognate oligonucleotides
consumption of these recipes on AO status in human was characterized.
volunteers. The AOA of salad prepared with green
gram sprouts with lemon, salt and pepper was the Resistin promoter sequences containing  the
highest among the different salad recipes tested binding  sites  for C/EBP, AP-1 and c-Rel shows
and the one prepared from Bengal gram sprouts binding with nuclear extracts prepared from
was the next best. corresponding cells. These experiments clearly
demonstrate that AP-1, C/EBP and c-Rel present in
E. Degenerative diseases the nucleus bind to the resistin promoter and could
thereby modulate the expression of human resistin.
Prolonged diabetes, without proper manage-
In addition to the extension and training ment, can lead to various  short - term and long - term
activities, the division has carried out research secondary complications, including diabetic cataract.
activities  pertaining  to  nutrition  education. Accumulation  of modified proteins due to unfolding
and aggregation is the major molecular event in
cataractogeneis.  Chaperone-like  function of one of
the lens  proteins, a -crystallin, is  believed  to  be vital
for  not  only  to  prevent protein aggregation in
cataract  formation  but  also  to  function  as  a  stress
mediator in many other stress conditions. Studies A study (Phase-I) using NSS volunteers as indicate  that  post  translational  modifications     change agents to educate the community on various such as  nonenzymatic  glycation  under  diabetic  aspects of nutrition was conducted. The NSS conditions has  a  negative  impact  on  the  chaperone  volunteers were selected from the colleges of urban function  of  a-crystallin  in terms of protecting and rural areas around Hyderabad. enzymes  against  inactivation.  Though,  expression
of a-crystallin is  increased due to  hyperglycemia
The initial knowledge levels were significantly induced  stress  in  many  tissues  including  lens,
different among the NSS volunteers of rural and there is enhanced degradation  and  modification.
urban areas (ANOVA, p<0.001). Intervention These  studies  provide a  link  between  chaperone
through nutrition education by using suitable function  of  a-crystallin  and  diabetic  cataract.
communication materials improved the nutrition Further  studies  are under way to manipulate the
knowledge of NSS volunteers of degree colleges. expression and modification viv-a-vis chaperone
Since the NSS volunteers are involved in community function o f   a-crystallin  by  dietary  agents.
education programmes, such programmes help
them to gain the nutrition knowledge which may in
turn help them to educate the community on health
5 . F O O D  A N D  D RU G  T OX I C O L O GY
exudate volume, reduced oxidative stress and
modulate levels of TNF-a and IL-6. The biological
plausibility as evident from the study suggest that
A. Food safety water and water plus methanol extracts of Rasna
panchaka can be considered as potential candidates
in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
A study was conducted to assess the possible
benefits of magnesium compound administration in The use of heavy metals like Lead (Pb), Mercury fluorosis and its capacity to mobilize already (Hg), Cadmium (Cd), Arsenic (As) etc. has resulted deposited fluoride from the bones as well as to in the rise of their levels in environment resulting in prevent new fluoride deposition and, toxicological exposure that is toxic to human health. Since one potential of Mg salts on various organs. decade, reports mostly from developed countries Simultaneous feeding of magnesium compound suggest that the heavy metals (Pb, Cd, Hg, As etc.) (milk of magnesia) reduces fluoride absorption used in industries, induce slow progressive and suggesting a beneficial effect of magnesium most of the times, irreversible damage to the hydroxide ingestion on fluoride retention and toxicity.  nervous, haemopoietic and renal systems in Histopathology and haematological study showed population. In addition, few reports indicate their that there was no adverse effect of magnesium interaction with nutrients (Fe, Zn, Cu, Mg, Ca etc.) compound in experimental animals.  and alteration in biochemical functions specially at
sub-cellular /cellular levels. The important
B. Cancer and xenobiotics physiological functions of essential metal ions like
Iron (Fe), Zinc (Zn), Copper (Cu), Magnesium (Mg)
etc. have been well established. Among the various     heavy metal toxicities reported, lead toxicity is Spices are important constituents in the reported from all parts of the world. The study preparation of various foods in Indian culinary suggested that among those screened 70% had practices. A study was undertaken on the lead level above 10µg/dl. The haemoglobin was antimutagenicity of fresh and dry forms of ginger inversely correlated with blood lead levels of under commonly practiced culinary conditions. The 15µg/dl. The serum iron levels were found to be antimutagenic effect of ginger was not altered in the high with blood lead levels. The correlation between extracts of ginger subjected to normal cooking zinc, Iron and lead levels indicates the interaction of conditions. nutrients and pollutants.
The results of earlier studies indicate that
extracts (coded 4308,4212,3107,3223 & 5322) of
plants, which are traditionally used as anti-
inflammatory drugs have potential antioxidant
activity as evaluated by battery of in vitro tests and  ex Two mutant obese rat strains, WNIN/Ob and vivo test (AR. 2002-04). The present investigation WNIN/GR-Ob were developed from the existing
was therefore undertaken to validate its anti- WNIN rat colony, which is being maintained at
inflammatory potential using standard experimental NCLAS in an inbred status for the past 84 years.
animal models. Both the mutants are obese, but WNIN/GR-Ob has
impaired glucose tolerance additionally. A study was
The study results suggest that aqueous and undertaken to establish genetic identity for these
alcoholic aqueous extracts of traditional two obese mutant rats. The cloned product from
preparations Rasna panchaka has potential anti- WNIN/GR-Ob were expressed both in mutant and
parental strain and thus not unique to the mutant.inflammatory activity as evident from decreased
mobilization of deposited fluoride in rabbits
5.4 Role of nutrients in environmental toxicity
5.2. Antimutagenicity of heat processed ginger
5.3.Ethnopharmacological validation of bio-
dynamic compounds in traditional medicine
6.1 PCR based DNA fingerprinting of WNIN
6.2.Establishment of baseline values of body
composition and blood pressure in different
species of laboratory animals maintained at
7.1.Safety/toxicity studies of ayurvedic
The coded Ayurvedic formulations developed by
CCRAS, MoH & FW are reported to have potential
therapeutic activity in chronic diseases and hence
were taken up for pre-clinical toxicity screening as
per WHO guidelines. Safety of five Ayurvedic National Centre for Laboratory Animal Sciences formulations “a,b,c,d&e' by acute/sub-acute toxicity (NCLAS) is maintaining different species of tests in mice/rats were evaluated as per the laboratory animals for biomedical research both for protocols suggested by sponsor.  in house use as well as supply to other institutions.
As the center is catering to the needs of several 7.1.1. Acute institutions including for pre-clinical toxicology
testing, it has become necessary to establish No mortality, morbidity, weight loss and normal physiological and biochemical values in the abnormal behaviour was recorded after a single most commonly used strains of laboratory animals.  exposure of a test compound with ten times of the Since rat strains are the most frequently used recommended therapeutic dose after 14 days in animals, initial studies were taken up in different Swiss albino mice which were exposed to the test strains maintained at the centre viz., Wistar/NIN formulations.(WNIN),  Sprague  Dawely  (SD),  Fischer - 344N
(F-344N), Wistar Kyoto (WKY), CFY and Holtzman. 7.1.2. Sub-Acute
Pre-terminal deaths occurred in animals The study showed that there were significant
receiving (therapeutic dose) 1XTD (10%), 5XTD differences between strains of rats in terms of body
(30%) and 10XTD (60-70%) of formulation a composition, physical activity, serum clinical  th th
between 14  day to 28  day, while the test chemistry and blood pressure.  By virtue of higher
compound b, c , d and e did not show any behavioral body weight for age in SD rats, their total body fat
changes. was also significantly higher than other strain of rats.
However, it is WNIN male rats, which had higher There were no pre-terminal deaths in animals percentage of body fat, higher resting time, higher receiving b test formulations at various dose levels.  plasma tryglycerides, higher heart rate when The physical and physiological activities, food intake compared to other strain of rats.  This was followed and gain in body weights were not significantly by Wistar Kyoto strain. The Fischer-344N rats different between groups exposed to b test showed the least growth rate, higher night time compound and animals receiving vehicle. There were activity. These studies show that there were pre-terminal deaths with formulation c of males only differences between strains and between genders (10%) in all the groups of animals receiving test in the same strain. formulations at various dose levels. There were no
histopathological changes due to formulation c, d &
The  Institute  continued  its  endeavours  to  meet
its mandate through various research projects that
were  initiated  in  IX Five Year Plan. Efforts are
continued  to identify newer emerging areas in The traditional use of Ayurvedic formulations is
different  fields  of  nutrition  research from time to one of the widely accepted therapy especially in the
time to develop need-based strategies to combat treatment of  chronic diseases viz. arthritis, asthma,
nutrient deficiency disorders in the country so as to infertility,  rejuvenation etc. The data on safety of the
meet the goals of the Country's National Nutrition Ayurvedic formulations has become important for
Policy.wider global acceptance of these products.