SOURCE: NIN
URL: https://www.nin.res.in/researchhighlights/2007-08.pdf
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

research activities of the institute this 64%) reportedly had 'paid female partners' and
year covered a wide spectrum of projects in consistent condom use with them ranged from 4 to
the fields of HIV/AIDS, adolescent obesity, 37%. The prevalence of HIV ranged from 9 to 26%,
osteoporotic hip fractures, diabetes mellitus, and that of syphilis was about 4 to 16%.
spices, fats-cancer interface, effect of pesticide
exposure, ayurvedic bhasmas, nutrition in school The mean age ranged from 28 to 31 years, with curriculum etc. The studies conducted had a fine a majority of them being literate (64% to 90%). blend of hospital, community and laboratory based Consistent condom use with regular or occasional research work. Also, studies done in the realms of FSWs, was in general low and ranged from 16% to basic research, molecular biology and laboratory 38%, while it was negligible with main/steady animal sciences revealed some interesting partner. The prevalence of HIV ranged from 2 to findings. Rich data were generated on health 8%, while that of syphilis ranged from a low 3 enhancing properties of roots, tubers and to10%. vegetables. New information pertaining to protein,
iron and zinc content in several rice varieties were
collected this year. The new research findings have
indeed provided the much needed value addition to
the existing research culture of the institute.
Obesity is one of the fast emerging public
health problems among adolescents and adults,
both in the developed as well as developing
hypertension, type 2 diabetes, coronary artery
diseases, stroke, etc. The present study, was
therefore, carried out to assess the prevalence of
overweight/obesity and identify its determinants
among adolescents of 12 to 17 years old in the
urban areas of Andhra Pradesh. A total of 8,142 The mean age was about 30 years, average
adolescents of 12–17 years age group were duration of sex work was 5 to 8 years, with mean
covered in the present study. number of clients during the previous week ranging
from 5 to16. Most of them (>90%) had occasional The overall prevalence of overweight was clients also. Consistent condom use ranged from about 6%, which was significantly (p< 0.05) higher 15 to 85% with regular clients and 36 to 89% with among girls (7.1%) as compared to boys (4.4%) occasional clients. The prevalence of HIV ranged and among the adolescents of high socio-from 8 to 26%, and that of syphilis was 5 to 17%. economic status (9.6%) as compared to low socio-
economic group (2.3%). The average duration of
The mean age ranged from 25 to 30 years. 'TV watching' was significantly higher (p< 0.05)
Majority were literate (58% - 82%) and nearly 90% among overweight and obese children (1.4
reportedly had non-commercial male/hijra hrs/day) as compared to controls (1.2 hrs/day) and
partners. The extent of consistent use of condom participation in outdoor games and sports for
was very low and ranged from 1 to 40%. However, 6hrs/week was significantly (p< 0.05) higher
condom use during the last sexual intercourse with among the non-obese children (31.9%) compared
paying male partners was more than >70% in all the to overweight and obese (17.5%). The proportion
districts. A considerable proportion of MSM (28 to of children consuming soft drinks was significantly
1.1 Integrated behavioural and biological
higher (p < 0.05) among the overweight and obese phytoferritins (plant iron-storage protein) has been
adolescents (21%) as compared to normal children developed as a screening tool for identifying high
(16%). The prevalence of hypertension (JNC iron in biofortified crops. This was used to quantify
Criteria VII) was significantly (p <0.05) higher phytoferritin levels in pulses which correlated well
among the overweight and obese children (8.3%) with their iron density. Zinc bioavailability using
as compared to non-obese children (3.7%).  The Caco-2 cells was developed, standardized and
study highlights the need to educate the validated by demonstrating modulation of
adolescents to promote physical activity, healthy bioavailability in the presence of known absorption
food habits and other life style practices to prevent enhancers and inhibitors. Caco-2 cells were used
overweight and obesity and the consequent diet- to understand the mechanism of negative
related chronic degenerative diseases. interactions between iron and zinc during uptake at
the enterocyte. Kinetic studies show that zinc
inhibition of iron uptake does not occur at DMT-1
(apical iron transporter) and cellular zinc status
profoundly affects quantity and pattern of iron
Barker's hypothesis speculates that under-
nutrition in intra-uterine period predisposes to
increased adiposity in later life. A study was done to
compare the body composition of SGA babies with
full term normal babies. Contrary to the earlier
studies which have shown relatively higher body fat
percentage in low birth weight (LBW) babies, this Earlier studies demonstrated that chronic
study assessing over 600 newborns has shown maternal micronutrient restriction altered the body
that neonatal body fat percent is increasing with composition [body fat %, lean body mass [LBM] and
increasing birth weight, and fat percent and fat free fat free mass [FFM]] in rat offspring and may
mass (FFM) were significantly low in LBW babies. predispose them to adult onset diseases. Since
No significant differences were observed in trace chromium regulates glucose and insulin metabolism,
element levels in either maternal or cord blood. the effect of maternal Cr restriction (CrR) on muscle
development and function in the offspring was
studied. In the offspring of WNIN female rats fed a
control or CrR diet throughout their phases of A study was carried out to measure the bone growth, pregnancy and lactation or CrR mothers parameters of men and women with confirmed
rehabilitated from conception, parturition or weaning osteoporotic fractures. The results of the study
indicate that maternal CrR  significantly decreased show that osteoporotic fractures in the study
LBM % and FFM % in the male and female offspring population (Hyderabad, hospital-based study)
suggesting a decreased muscle and / or bone mass. occurred at least 10-15 years earlier as compared
to Western population. Expression of the myogenic genes : Pax3, MyoD,
Myf5 and MyoG, was significantly decreased in their
muscle indicating that impaired muscle development
could be a contributor to the decreased LBM % and
FFM %. Although basal glucose uptake by muscle
Micronutrient research group has been was higher in CrR than CrC offspring, the fold
involved in developing novel strategies to combat increase with insulin was comparable suggesting no
micronutrient malnutrition, especially of iron, zinc change in its insulin sensitivity. Interestingly, body
and vitamin A and understanding their composition changes were seen in male offspring
mechanism(s) of absorption. Towards this, a rapid only at 18 months of age, whereas, in females they
and sensitive common immuno assay (ELISA) for were observed from 12 months onwards.
2.1 Neonatal anthropometric data and body
composition in Small for Gestational Age
Rehabilitation from conception but not parturition or by a distant second in raw mangoes while pumpkin
weaning partly corrected the changes in expression had the lowest activity. In general, there was a
of myogenic genes but not those in LBM % or FFM % significant correlation between the phenolic
or glucose uptake by the muscle in vitro. Thus, content and AOA (both methods) in the foods
maternal Cr restriction in WNIN rats appears to studied.
irreversibly impair muscle development and function
Activation of polyol pathway due to increased
aldose reductase (ALR2) activity has been Both the camel milk as well as cow milk (raw,
implicated in the development of diabetic pasteurized or boiled) has no hypoglycemic effect
complications including diabetic retinopathy (DR), in the streptozotocin induced model of hypergly-
a leading cause of adult blindness which is also the cemia / type 1 diabetes in WNIN rats at the dosage
most common complication of diabetes. However, level tested. However, they have a comparable
the relationship between hyperglycemia-induced hypoglycemic effect in high sucrose diet induced
activation of polyol pathway in retina and DR is still model of hyperglycemia / type 2 diabetes in WNIN
uncertain. The relationship between ALR2 levels rats and the effect is heat stable in general in both
and human DR in a case-control study was the milks. Further, the hypoglycemic effect of both
investigated. Type-2 diabetes (T2D) patients with these milk samples, appears not to be due to their
DR showed significantly higher specific activity of ability to modulate basal levels of plasma insulin or
ALR2 as compared to T2D patients without DR. the secretion to a challenge of oral glucose load.
Elevated levels of sorbitol in T2D patients with DR From the results it appears that at the dosage level
substantiated the increased ALR2 activity in employed in these studies, the hypoglycemic effect
erythrocytes of DR patients. Thus, levels of ALR2 of camel milk does not seem to be greatly different
activity and/or sorbitol in erythrocytes may have from that of cow milk in both the models of
value as a quantitative trait to be included among hyperglycemia (i.e., drug or diet induced).
other markers to establish a risk profile for
As a part of efforts to generate the database on
the phenolic content and antioxidant activity (AOA)
Diabetic retinopathy is one of the most of plant foods commonly consumed in India, data
devastating microvascular complications of has been generated this year on roots, tubers and
diabetes. Neovascularization stimulated by hyperg-vegetables. In general there was a wide variation in
lycemia mediated induction of vascular endothelial the phenolic content and AOA of the foods
growth factor (VEGF) has been implicated in the analysed. Among the roots and tubers, beetroot
pathogenesis. Various small molecules have been and carrot had the highest and the lowest phenolic
investigated for their ability to inhibit angiogenesis. In content and AOA as determined by the DPPH
this study, it was demonstrated that feeding of scavenging and FRAP methods. Among the
curcumin and turmeric to diabetic rats inhibited vegetables, red cabbage and ridge gourd had the
expression of VEGF. This study highlighted the highest and the least phenolic content. DPPH
importance of biologically active compounds derived scavenging activity was the highest in beet root
from dietary agents that could be explored further for followed by red cabbage in a close second place
the prevention and/or treatment of diabetic while ridge gourd had the least activity. On the other
retinopathy.hand, FRAP was highest in red cabbage followed
4.1.2 Hypoglycemic / insulin like activity in
4.2.1 Erythrocyte aldose reductase activity camel milk: Quantification of the
and sorbitol and diabetic retinopathyeffect in animal models of diabetes /
commonly consumed in India: Roots, 4.2.2 Effect of curcumin on hyperglycemia-
Tubers and other vegetables induced vascular endothelial growth
4.2.3 Effect of turmeric and curcumin on
4.2.4 Anticataractogenic effect of ginger
4.2.5  Inhibition of aldose reductase by
these sources. Further, rutin is one of the flavonols,
which is abundantly present in many fruits and
vegetables. Studies conducted at NIN indicate that
rutin inhibited ALR2 with an IC  value 16 µM. It is 50
specific towards ALR2 (over ALR1) and prevented There is increasing evidence that compli-
the accumulation of sorbitol in RBC. These results cations related to diabetes are associated with
suggest the significance of rutin as a specific and increased oxidative stress. Curcumin, an active
potent ALR2 inhibitor, which could be explored principle of turmeric, has several biological
further for preventing or delaying of diabetic properties including antioxidant activity. The
complications.protective effect of curcumin and turmeric on
streptozotocin (STZ)-induced oxidative stress in
various tissues of rats was studied. Results of this
study indicate that curcumin and turmeric
controlled diabetes-mediated oxidative stress by
inhibiting the lipid and protein oxidation and
reversing altered antioxidant enzyme activities
without altering hyperglycemic state in most of the The etiology of T2DM has a strong genetic
tissues. Hence, turmeric and curcumin might be component and variations in several candidate
beneficial in preventing the diabetes-induced genes have been widely implicated. Earlier, in spite
oxidative stress. of a very high incidence of type 2 diabetes, efforts to
detect any association of a common variant
Pro12Ala (rs1801282) of PPARg with type 2
diabetes failed, indicating that the Indian
population is unique in its genomic architecture and Formation of advance glycation end products possibly some yet uncharacterized genetic (AGE) through non-enzymatic glycation of proteins variants may be responsible for predisposing them is one of the mechanisms that is implicated in the to type 2 diabetes. Therefore, whether other development of diabetic complications.  Therefore, polymorphisms in candidate genes such as TNFa,
inhibition of AGE formation is of considerable value adiponectin and resistin are associated with type 2
in ameliorating the complications of diabetes like diabetes in the Indian population was investigated.
cataract. A number of dietary sources for their
antiglycating activity was evaluated and ginger, Hence, four polymorphisms in the adiponectin
gene and one in TNFa?in a cohort (n=699) from one of the agents, has shown antiglycating activity
Hyderabad were screened. It was found that in the in vitro studies. In this study, it was demonst-
G308A variant in TNFa was significantly associ-rated that ginger is effective in delaying the onset
ated with waist circumference (p=0.0125) but not and progression of diabetic cataract in rats. These
with T2DM, hypertension and BMI. On the other results, thus, provide a basis for the antiglycating
hand, the T+45G variant of the adiponectin gene effect of ginger that may have pharmacological
was not found to be associated with any of the implications in the treatment of diabetic
mentioned disease conditions. Interestingly, in complications.
contrast to other populations, any of the G+276T,
G-11377A and C-11391G variants of adiponectin
gene in this cohort could not be detected. These
data suggest a certain level of genetic uniqueness
Inhibition of ALR2 represents one of the in Indian population and varied effects of different
means for the treatment of diabetic complications. factors on different populations. It will be interesting
In the course of investigations on the evaluation of to screen the Indian population for novel variants,
aldose reductase inhibitory activity from natural which might be responsible for making it vulnerable
sources,  a significant inhibition with some dietary to metabolic disorders as a result of changing
sources was found. Based on the data base search environmental factors including demographic and
it was found that rutin is a common flavonoid in life style changes.
5 .  F O O D  C O M P O S I T I O N  A N D
5.1 Evaluation of the nutritional potential
7.1 Genotoxicological effects of pesticides
in agricultural farmers in Guntur district
n3+n6 group, suggesting that n3 may probably
have a protective effect. Immunohistochemistry
study of adenocarcinomas, showed that n3+n6 diet
followed by n3 diet alone had better results than
Studies on the nutritional potential of eri silk
Biochemical estimates indicated that carcinogen worm pupae, a byproduct of the silk industry has
administration did not have much effect on glucose shown that it offers tremendous scope for the
and lipid metabolism. Haematological parameters utilization of eri protein and fat as food source.
were unremarkable in all groups studied.        Nutritional and toxicological evaluation of eri silk
worm oil has shown that it is safe for consumption Fatty acid analysis revealed that TFA which is and the high á-LNA in its oil could be used to known to induce/promote carcinogenesis did not nutritional and commercial advantage. show increased tumor incidence, thereby
suggesting that at the level of consumption (10%) it
may not be promoting tumor formation. As
6.1 Role of type of dietary fat in the anticipated, SFA levels were more in PO fed
etiopathogenesis of carcinogen – animals as compared to others. With respect to n3
induced  breast  neoplasm  in  Fischer fatty acid levels, the lower tumor incidence may be
female rats because of its anti-inflammatory role which was
The study was undertaken to investigate the also evident in n3+n6 fed animals as compared to
possible etiological roles played by different types n6 only fed animals. This could also be because of
of dietary fats in female Fisher 344 rats using a lower n6 : n3 ratio in SFO + FO group. N6 rich diet
carcinogen and also to study the role of insulin consumption showed highest tumor incidence and
resistance and hyperinsulinemia in mammary density which could be attributed to increased
carcinogenesis in these animals. inflammation and this in turn could be due to
increased oxidative stress/arachidonic acid.
A total of 80 animals were divided into 5 Mammary adipose tissue  in C+ animals was
groups and given either Transfats / saturated / n3 surprisingly very minimal / not present and hence
rich / n6 rich and n6 + n3 fats in their diets at 10% no analysis could be undertaken which could have
level for 4 months followed by administration of otherwise  added valuable  information to data
carcinogen DiMethylBenzAntherecene (DMBA) in generated from this study.
50% of animals in each group. DMBA was given
(40mg/kg body weight per dose) at weekly intervals Finally, it appears that n6 rich diet has
for 4 weeks by oral route and all animals were deleterious effects in relation to tumorogenesis
continued on their respective diets for a further while n3 alone diet has a better outlook with respect
period of 8 months (32 weeks). to the same. Apart from n3 diet, n3 + n6 diet was
also observed to be beneficial.  SFA and TFA diets
Based on the results obtained, it appears that that are associated with increased incidence of
the body weights of animals not given carcinogen  CVD and other chronic diseases do not seem to
(C-) were, as expected, significantly higher than in show a similar trend with respect to carcinogen
carcinogen administered (C+) animals. When both induced mammary neoplasms.
the above groups were analysed separately, it was
seen that n3 + n6 diet fed animals showed better
body weights than others and that n3+n6 diet was
much better acceptable than other diets. As
adenocarcinomas, squamous cell carcinomas and
benign tumors were more in n6 fed groups as
compared to others.  Both the above parameters The widespread use of pesticides and
were found to be lower in n3 group as compared to exposure is a health hazard.  Although a million
cases of pesticide toxicity are documented every glutathione (40.52 ± 1.50), and a-tocopherol in
year around the World, there is only limited data experimental group (7.58 ±0.22) were significantly
available on its cytogentetic effects.  In addition, reduced (p<0.01) when compared to control
acute exposure to pesticides leads to generation of subjects. There was a significant reduction in the
free radicals which include oxidative stress, lipid level of GSH in the experimental subjects, while the
peroxidation and alterations in antioxidant status in activity of catalase in the experimental subjects
animals and humans. Hence, a study was increased when compared to control subjects. The
conducted in cotton growing farmers in Guntur liver and kidney function tests such as SGPT and
district of A.P. These cotton growing farmers use urea were normal in both groups.
more complex mixture of pesticides when The studies suggest that there is a need to compared to the farmers of other districts of the curtail the indiscriminate use of pesticides and that
State. Therefore, the study was taken up to assess farmers should be enlightened to follow good
the extent of toxicity by analyzing the different test agricultural practices.
parameters which are the best toxicity indicators of
Aims & Objectives of this study were to assess
the toxicity of the commonly used pesticides viz.,
organochlorines, organophosphates etc in the
agricultural farmers of Guntur district by AchE Development of innovative nutrition education
inhibition and to assess the cytogenetic changes curricula is a continuous and demanding process.
and also the DNA damage in the blood of Before developing the nutrition content that can be
agricultural farmers by chromosomal aberrations effectively blended into the school science
(CAs), lymophocyte micronucleus test, and sister curricula, the first step would be to evaluate the
chromatid exchange. nutrition component in the existing school science
textbooks. A study was carried out with an aim to
The results of the cytogenetic analysis assess the over all nutrition component in the
indicated that out of the 4,547 metaphase plates school science curricula. NCERT and AP State
scored in the exposed subjects (312), 213 (4.7%) Education Board text books were considered for
found to have CAs.  Similarly, in the un-exposed the study. The study which systematically applied
group (312) out of the 3,267 metaphase plates quantitative and qualitative methods of Content
analysed 55 (1.7%) were found to be positive for Analysis concluded that the space allocated for
CA .  A significant increase in CAs in the agricultural biology in relation to physical sciences was lesser
farmers exposed to pesticides indicates that in higher classes (VI and above). Nutrition
chronic/sub chronic occupational exposure to component is systematically organized at primary
complex mixture of pesticides is genotoxic.  In the school level (till V Class), but not so much at high
present investigation, 102 of the subjects from school level. Nutrition, in whichever class it is
exposed group were found to be positive for covered after class III in both NCERT and AP
micronuclei (0.15%) whereas in the un exposed syllabi, deals only with – food groups or nutrient
group 89 (0.13%) subjects were found to be deficiency disorders. The study found that many
positive for micronuclei. important topics such as nutrition and growth, link
The results of the AchE activity in RBC communicable diseases in adulthood, adolescent
indicated that there was a significant (p<0.0.5) nutrition, nutrition for girl child, hidden hunger,
decrease in the RBC AchE activity of the lifestyle factors and obesity, nutrition during
experimental subjects when compared to controls. pregnancy and lactation, importance of breast
Lipid peroxidation in terms of thiobarbituric acid feeding, unhealthy foods, fortification etc. are not
reactive substance (2.68 ± 0.056) was significantly covered in the curricula. Considering that many
increased when compared to control subjects earlier studies indicated that school based nutrition
(p<0.01), while the antioxidants such as reduced education is preferred mode of learning and
effective way of education, the results of this study
will be useful during future revisions of the
textbooks for strengthening the nutrition
Tetravalent Vaccine (Diphtheria, Tetanus,
Pertussis + Recombinant Hepatitis B antigen) is a
prophylactic agent against Diphtheria, Tetanus,
Pertussis and Hepatitis B by eliciting immunity in
sufficient doses. Tetravalent vaccines are very
important for preventing diseases like Diphtheria, From the original WNIN parental stock, two Tetanus, Pertussis and Hepatitis B. Indian obese mutant strains were developed and Immunologicals has prepared this Tetravalent designated as WNIN/Ob and WNIN/GR-Ob. vaccine as per DCGI guidelines, Schedule Y, Drugs These strains showed hyperphagia, higher body and Cosmetic (Second Amendment) Rules, 2005, fat, hypertriglyceridemia, hyperinsulinemia, Government of India following GMP.  The hypercholesterolemia and hyperleptinemia. objectives of the study were to assess the safety Additionally, impaired glucose tolerance was profile of Tetravalent vaccine which elicits immunity observed in WNIN/GR-Ob rats. The present study against the four diseases (Diphtheria, Pertussis, is aimed to check whether long-term exercise will Tetanus, Hepatitis B) and to Test the allergenic have any marked effect on the body composition, potential of tetravalent vaccine.insulin resistance and lipid profile of these mutant
rats.  The test material tetravalent vaccine (TV), DPT
and Hep-B was tested for acute toxicity test (14 So, a total of 72 animals from these two
days) in swiss albino mice & Sprauge Dawley rats. mutants along with parental strain WNIN were
Sub chronic toxicity test was carried out in Swiss taken at 35 days of age and divided into 3 groups.
albino mice and Guinea pigs. In acute toxicity test, Two groups of animals were taken for exercise
mice and rats were exposed once to highest dose on Rota-rod treadmill and the remaining served
(10 times of intended therapeutic dose) by sub as controls.  Exercise was carried out at two
cutaneous route and observed for lethality. In sub speeds for two different durations. Daily food
chronic toxicity test Therapeutic Dose (TD) of DPT, intake and weekly body weights were measured
TD of Hep- B, TD of TV and five times of TD of TV and body compositions of these animals were
were tested.  The results showed no abnormalities analyzed by using total body electrical
in physical, physiological, clinical chemistry, conductivity (TOBEC). Insulin resistance, lipid
hematological, pathological, immunotoxicological profile and serum lactate levels were measured
and genotoxicological parameters. by standard procedures. The study showed that
reduced insulin resistance in all three strains of
rats tested. Ayurvedic formulations are classified into
various groups viz., Kadla (decoction), churnas There were only marginal changes by doubling
(Powder), Bhasmas (Mineral + herbal prepara-the intensity of exercise. Simultaneous decrease in
tions) etc. Bhasmas are calcined powder of metals, LBM, total body sodium and water suggests that
minerals, gems etc. Traditional literature has there is extra cellular fluid loss in exercised animals
provided standard guidelines to prepare such when compared to controls. This is  also reflected
formulations in non-toxic, therapeutically potential in terms of increased total body potassium.
formulation. As per the traditional system, these Exercise also had positive effect on reducing
formulations are recommended to treat chronic plasma triglyceride levels. The alterations in
neurological diseases viz., liver disorder, arthritis, plasma lactate levels suggest that the glucose
diabetes, neurological disorders. These are sold as utilization is higher with low intensity exercise when
rejuvenator substances. However, in the recent compared to high intensity exercise.
10.1 Pre-clinical toxicity evaluation of
9.1 Effect of  long-term exercise in WNIN
10.2 Safety / toxicity studies of Ayurvedic
past, presence of metals in such formulations sold
at grocery shops in international market are
reported and so these can be potential toxicants. In
view of this observation, CCRAS has proposed a
multicentric pre-clinical safety evaluation of various
herbomineral formulations as per inter-national
guidelines. The present investigation was carried
out to assess the safety of products as per the
international guidelines. The Objective was to
assess the Pre-clinical Toxicity of coded Vn & Wn
Ayurvedic Bhasmas as per the International
recommended in a clinical dose of 30mg and 60mg
respectively for 3-4 weeks were provided by the
sponsor. The present investigation involved acute
toxicity test (14 days) in swiss albino mice, sub
acute toxicity test (30 days) and long-term term
toxicity test (120 days) in Swiss Albino mice &
WNIN Rats. In acute toxicity test, mice were
exposed once to highest dose (10 times of intended
therapeutic dose) by oral gavage and observed for
lethality. The test compound was administered
daily with 33% honey water (v/v) for 15 days and 30
days in Sub acute toxicity, long term toxicity test
respectively in various dose levels viz. therapeutic
dose (TD), average dose (TDx5) and high dose
(TDx10). The results of acute toxicity test showed
no lethality in mice and rats after a single exposure th
to 50 times of therapeutic dose till 14  day.
In subacute toxicity test, 10% pre-terminal
deaths were recorded in mice, exposed to TD & 5
times of TD in both Vn and Wn Bhasmas. No pre-
terminal deaths were recorded in rats. No
significant treatment related effect were seen on
food intake, body weight gain, clinical signs,
behavioral activity etc in the survived animals. No
significant changes in hematological parameters
and clinical chemistry parameters were observed.
In long term toxicity test, pre-terminal deaths were
recorded in VC (10%), TD (15%), AD (10%), HD
(10%) in mice which received Vn and Wn Bhasmas
for 90 days.   Mortality was 5% in rats exposed to
Wn.  No significant treatment related effects were
seen on food intake, body weight gain, clinical
signs, behavioral activity etc. No significant
changes in hematological and clinical chemistry
parameters were found. Genotoxicity effect was
observed in those which were given ten times of
The Skimmed Milk Fermentate (SMF) having
bacteriocin type activity has been developed by
indigenous technology, with an intention to promote
it as a bio-preservative for Indian dairy products.
The SMF has been produced by fermenting skim
milk with a bacteriocinogenic (bacteriocin produ-
cing) strain of food grade lactic acid bacterium,
Pediococcus pentosaceus, isolated from Cheddar
cheese. National Dairy Development Board is keen
to exploit this product for its use as a preservative in
commonly consumed dairy products in India.
The Objective was to carry out preclinical
toxicology of SMF to ensure its safety. The intended
daily dietary intake (DDI) of SMF was calculated
(1.2gm/day i.e.0.001%w/w). The investigation
involved acute toxicity test (14 days) in swiss albino
mice and WNIN rats and Sub chronic toxicity test in
WNIN Rats. In acute toxicity test, mice and rats
were exposed once to highest dose of test material
(10 times of intended therapeutic dose) by oral
gavage and observed for lethality. Sub chronic test
has been conducted in Rats (Wistar NIN) receiving
the diet containing 0.2%, 1%, 2% SMF.  In addition,
a group of animals received the diet with low protein
(30%), and less fat (15%) which is considered
The results of this study showed no lethality in
mice/rats after a single exposure to maximum
quantity of SMF in acute toxicity test. In sub-chronic
toxicity test, there were no pre-terminal deaths
except one animal which died on 62  day of drug
exposure receiving 2% SMF and no significant
treatment related effect on food intake, body weight
gain, clinical signs, behavioral activity etc. was
noticed.  There were no abnormalities in hemato-
logical, clinical chemistry, histopathological para-
meters.  At higher dose, some genotoxic effect was
10.3 Pre-clinical toxicity evaluation of