SOURCE: NIN
URL: https://www.nin.res.in/researchhighlights/2006-07.pdf
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

The hallmark of sound research is adoption The study revealed that a high proportion of
of new scientific techniques and approaches women opt for institutional deliveries and a
tailor-made for the changing needs and majority of the home deliveries are conducted by
situations. Several such novel needs were Trained Birth Attendants (TBAs) in the PD areas
utilized this year both in the basic as well as as compared to control areas. Recording of birth
applied research fields. Use of positive deviance weights of newborns was significantly higher in
approach in community nutrition, integrated PD areas, as compared to control areas.
feeding and care interventions, Integrated Similarly, a significantly higher proportion of
Behavioural and Biological Assessment to study mothers fed colostrum, and initiated breast-
HIV-related aspects and commercialization of feeding within 3 hours of delivery. Initiation of
fortification (of salt) technology are some such complementary feeding at 6 months of age
examples. The Food and Drug Toxicology among children currently aged 12-23 months
Research Centre (FDTRC) also carried out a was significantly higher in PD areas. A
series of community based and laboratory - significantly higher proportion of children were
based investigations to study endemic kidney completely immunized by one year of age; they
damage in some segments of population, were covered for massive dose vitamin A
surveys to assess community's perception supplementation and were subjected to regular
towards practices related to food and drug use, growth monitoring in PD area. The overall
pre-clinical toxicity of JE vaccine are some prevalence of stunting was significantly lower in
research  investigations done at the division. PD area as compared to control area.
This year also witnessed the accelerated  growth
Pre-clinical Toxicity established in the recent
undertook a study entitled “Assessment of
Nutritional Status of < 5 year children in the
select districts in the country” to generate
baseline data, where UNICEF interventions are The 'Positive Deviance' (PD) is an asset
in operation.based approach, built on the belief that in every
community  there exists few mothers with A total of 12,879 children were covered from special efforts or better child care practices, 9,576 households in 480 villages of 16 districts which enable them to prevent undernutrition representing 13 States. About 57-98% women among their children, compared to their reportedly fed colostrum to their newborns and counterparts, who live in similar socio - economic about 40-79% of the mothers initiated breast-background and resources, and are exposed to feeding within 3 hours of delivery, in various the same risks from the existing environment”. districts surveyed. About 20-58% of mothers The Government of West Bengal, with the reportedly gave pre-lacteal feeds to the assistance of UNICEF, initiated PD programme newborn. About 30-87% of the mothers of 6-11 in 4 districts, utilizing the existing ICDS months children initiated complementary infrastructure, to accelerate the process of feeding by the age of 6 months. The proportion of reduction and prevention of undernutrition completely immunized among 12-23 months among children in the age group of 0-3 years in a children ranged from a low 52% to a high 98%.  short time. About 33-64% of pre-school children were of
underweight, while prevalence of stunting and At the request of UNICEF, the National
wasting  was  in  the  ranges  of  31 - 54% and Institute of Nutrition, carried out the impact
15-25% respectively in different districts.evaluation of the programme.
< 5 year children in the select districts in
1.1 Impact Evaluation of Positive Deviance
with zinc and adipokines in young adults
2.2 Double blind Randomized controlled trial
supplemented children, per 100 days followup
prevalence of osteoporosis in adult population in
It has been shown that there is several fold India has  been completed.  In addition, the
increase of coronary heart disease from 1960 to assessment of the peak bone mass in population
1990 in the urban India. A major proportion of who have no constraints to growth has also been
these patients are relatively young and 35-40% carried out.
show no major risk factors. Higher triglyceride, Preliminary results suggest that the bone lower HDL and increased visceral fat and insulin densities of population from the high, middle and resistance have been proposed as reasons for low socio-economic groups are significantly the higher risk of CHD and type 2 diabetes. Role different.  The bone densities at all the 3 sites  of sub clinical micronutrient deficiency in this (hip, spine and forearm)  improve and the phenotype of central obesity and increased prevalence of osteoporosis decreases as one insulin resistance and its association with goes up the class scale in men and women. adipokines and CHD risk factors in young adults
(20-30) was studied. Over 43% of women (ages 30+) from the low
income group are osteoporotic at the spine but 3.5% of the subjects under study had high after the age of 60+ years the prevalence of serum glucose values (>=110 mg/dl), a osteoporosis is over 90%  when compared to significant proportion (43.8%) of them had poor women from the high income group  (16% insulin sensitivity (HOMA >=3.16). A proportion overall osteoporosis at the spine after the age of of 36.3% had BMI >=23.0. Adiponectin was 30+ years and 45% after the age of 60+ years). inversely associated with BMI while resistin was
comparable. When the subjects were stratified The age at peak bone mass of populations
based on HOMA, subjects with HOMA >=3.16 who have no constraints to growth appears to be
had significantly lower Zinc and adiponectin between 25 to 30 years at all the 3 sites and it is
compared to subjects with HOMA<3.16 group.not very different from the BMD values reported
from the west.  This study will provide an A significant proportion of young adults have important data base for future studies on bone high BMI and insulin resistance as indicated by health in India. HOMA. Similar to other reports, adiponectin, an
adipokine was inversely associated with insulin
sensitivity. Zinc might have a beneficial role in
insulin sensitivity. The present study also
indicates a male predisposition to develop Zinc is an important nutrient for growth and insulin resistance and higher BMI associated other functions. Results of a randomized with low zinc status.controlled trial  of over 470 subjects where half of
them received zinc (5mg/day) and the other half
received placebo for a period of 14 months,
differences in weights or heights between
Developing strategies for the prevention and supplemented and control children.  There was a
control of micronutrient deficiencies has been small but significant increase in body fat
the major focus of the institute. The institute has percentage in supplemented children at 12
developed operationalized strategies like DFS months of age (20.2±5.34 Vs 19.0±4.4, p=0.02).
with iron and iodine and whole wheat flour Similarly, mean number of episodes of diarrhoea
fortified with iron, folic acid and vitamin A. was not significantly different between supple-
Biofortification of staple crops is an emerging mented and control groups (1.46 Vs 1.62) and
area in the filed of nutrition science. It involves mean diarrheal duration was significantly low in
screening, selecting and conventional breeding (Telugu), Divya Bhaskar (Gujarat) and Dainik
of germplasm for high micronutrient density. Bhaskar (Rajasthan)] with regard to technology
Department of Biotechnology is funding a transfer of NIN-DFS. In response to the
networking project on crop biofortification and advertisement, 12 applications from salt
NIN is coordinating all the nutritional studies manufacturers were received. Furthermore,
under this project and has become a networking letters have been written to the Secretaries of
unit for nutritional studies planned under the Women Development and Child Welfare
DBT's Crop Biofortification Networking project.  Department of all the States & UTs in the country
(total: 35) advocating the introduction of NIN-Caco-2 cell line (cell line derived from human DFS in nutritional programmes of the States & intestinal enterocytes) is an alternative to the UTs. The details of DFS according to NIN formula laborious animal experimentation and is and its large-scale production in factories have relatively simple to use it as a screening method been published in peer reviewed scientific for assessing bioavailability of nutrients. NIN has journals.  Therefore, IPR issues are not involved established a coupled in vitro digestion/Caco-2 in the technology transfer.  The modalities of the cell iron bioavailability method for screening for transfer of technology are being worked out.iron bioavailability in staple foods. This method
has been developed using ferritin content of
Caco-2 cell as a surrogate marker of iron
bioavailability, measured using an indigenously
developed ELISA for human serum ferritin. The demand for the Field Kits for testing
Currently, the target of iron crop biofortification is iodine in iodized salt as well as double fortified
phytoferritin  and iron bioavailability study in salt and iron in double fortified salt is increasing
Caco-2 cell with phytoferritin from pea seed day by day. Therefore, the large-scale
has shown that the pea ferritin is susceptible for production of these kits was taken up. The colour
gastric and intestinal digestion and the iron gradation card of the kit is replaced by a colour
bioavailability is similar to that of the chemical gradation sticker with instructions for use and is
source of iron, ferrous sulphate. pasted on the plastic dropper bottle of the test
solution. The cost of each of iodine kit is Rs. 7/-
and the cost of iron kits is Rs. 10/-  and one kit
can be used  to test 200-250 salt samples.
The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
Government of India constituted a Technical
Committee of Experts under the Chairmanship
of Dr. M. K. Bhan, Secretary of the Department of
“Formulation of guidelines for use of iodine & iron
double fortified salt (DFS) as a measure to
reduce prevalence of anaemia” vide letter No. Z th
28020/16/2005-CH/PH dated 14  July 2005.  Dr.
Bhan Committee, after detailed deliberations,
recommended for the commercial production of Impaired chaperone function of a-crystallin could DFS according to NIN's formula and to introduce be involved in the formation of diabetic cataract. it in nutritional programmes for vulnerable We have demonstrated that in diabetic cataract, groups (Recommendations of Dr. Bhan a-crystallin chaperone activity is diminished. th
Committee dated 16  November 2006).   Interestingly, dietary cumin delayed progression
and maturation of diabetic cataract by modulating As per the recommendations of the ICMR
the chaperone activity of a-crystallin. The Expert Committee on commercialization of DFS,
antiglycating effect of cumin appears to be the an advertisement was released during
predominant mechanism for the modulatory December 2006 in newspapers [The Times of
effect on a-crystallin chaperone activity in India: All editions, Nav Bharat Times (Hindi:
diabetes and thereby delaying cataract in rats.Mumbai + Delhi), Dinamalar (Tamil), Eenadu
4.2.2. Commercialization of iodine & iron
4.2.1.Commercialization of double fortified
5.1.1 Crystallins in health & disease and
a-crystallin under diabetic cataract by cumin:
(ii) Regulation of Expression of -crystallins
Effect of maternal dietary trace element (Mg, Mn,
Cr and Zn) restriction on the body adiposity and
(I) Emblica Officinalis and its isolated
tannoids delayed diabetic cataract in rats
(ii) Specificity of dietary aldose reductase
a dietary sources against secondary compli-
cations of diabetes as a food based therapeutic
approach.Earlier,  for the first time, elevated
expression of small heat shock protein, a-
crystallin, in various diabetic tissues and the
significance of which is being studied was
reported. Heat shock protein (Hsp) expression is
regulated transcriptionally by heat shock factors
(Hsf) and there are three Hsf (Hsf 1, Hsf 2 & Hsf
4) in vertebrates. Among the three Hsf, Hsf1
appears to control the expression of a-crystallins
under diabetic conditions. In earlier reports WNIN rats that maternal
chronic magnesium restriction irreversibly
increased the body fat % and decreased lean
body mass (LBM), fat free mass (FFM), insulin
response to glucose challenge in the offspring up
to 18 months of age. Insulin resistance (HOMA
IR) which was significantly higher at 6 months of
Preliminary screening studies and ex vivo age continued to be high till 18 months albeit not
lens organ culture studies suggest that tannoids significant. In addition to lowered muscle mass
of amla have significant aldose reductase (decreased LBM & FFM) basal glucose uptake
inhibitory potential. Results from animal studies was also significantly and irreversibly reduced in
indicate that Emblica and its tannoids are magnesium restricted (MgR) offspring at 18
effective against development of diabetic months of age. The increased adiposity was
cataract in rats mainly by countering the polyol associated with significant hypoleptinemia and
pathway induced osmotic and oxidative stress. increase in TNF  levels while adiponectin levels
Moreover, these results indicate that Emblica were unchanged. In line with these observations,
and its tannoids may act downstream to glucose- expression of fatty acid synthase (FAS) and fatty
mediated changes. Further, these results have acid transporter protein 1 (FATP1) was
implications in terms of exploring the ingredients increased in liver and adipose tissue. However,
of dietary sources for the treatment of diabetic preliminary observations  seem to suggest that
complications other than diabetic cataract. the observed alterations in the expression of the
proteins mentioned above may not be due to
Although many aldose reductase inhibitors
(ARI) have been extensively studied with
promising results, none have demonstrated
sufficient efficacy in human clinical trials. The
likely cause of these side effects is a lack of As part of efforts to generate a database on
selectivity towards related enzymes involved in the phenolic content of plant foods commonly
the detoxification of reactive aldehydes, consumed in India and on their health enhancing
particularly aldehyde reductase  (ALR1). Many effects including antioxidant activity (AOA), the
ARI are shown to equally interact with aldehyde total phenolic content and AOA (by three
reductase. During the last three years,  many different methods : FRAP, DPPH – radical
dietary sources for their potential to inhibit aldose scavenging activity and reducing power) of some
reductase were screened and found significant commonly consumed cereals, millets, legumes,
inhibition with some dietary sources. Then the pulses green leafy vegetables, fruits (including
specificity of these dietary ARI against ALR1 was dry fruits) and spices were determined. In
investigated. Specific inhibition of aldose general, phenolic content and antioxidant
reductase by the dietary sources in the study has activities determined by the three different
given a direction to explore the potential of methods showed a wide range of distribution in
5.1.2. Studies on role of functional foods
all the types of plant foods studied . Among the
foods tested the AOA showed the following order
: spices > vegetables and fruits > legumes and The presence of pesticides in foods and
pulses > cereals and millets. Correlation analysis beverages is a matter of concern. Some
indicated that phenolics were correlated variably commonly consumed carbonated drinks were
with different types of AOA in different classes of analysed for pesticide residues and the report
foods tested. For example, they were correlated has been submitted to the concerned authorities.
maximally to DPPH radical scavenging activity
and FRAP in dry fruits, with only FRAP in cereals
and millets whereas they showed no significant
In order to create awareness on food safety correlation with any type of AOA in legumes and
and strengthen food safety monitoring system in pulses. In spices, PC was correlated maximally
the country, Government of India has initiated with DPPH radical scavenging activity followed
several projects under overall World Bank by inhibition of auto oxidation of carotene in
assisted Capacity Building Project. One of the carotene- linoleic acid mixture.
important components of the project is to
conduct surveys which cover household and
street foods. The household survey was carried
out by FDTRC, NIN with the assistance of four
practices related to food and drugs.  A grant of
Rs. 1.27 crore was given to conduct the survey.
The survey was conducted in 28 states. NIN was
nodal centre and regional centre for south.
A community-based cross-sectional study The results  of the survey indicated that
was carried out during October 2006 in about 64% Indians  are non-vegetarians of
Uchapally village of Nellore district, Andhra whom 63% store cooked non-vegetarian food at
Pradesh, India. A total of 52 subjects including 32 room temperature. Only 29% consumed stored
subjects suffering from kidney related problems food after reheating. Majority of households
(Group A), (identified by District Health Officials) reported that they buy packed foods, out of
and 20 apparently normal subjects, randomly whom, only 21% look for symbols on the label.
selected from the health camp (Group B) for About 54% of respondents did not know or
comparison was studied. Community based associate diarrhoea as a symptom of foodborne
cross-sectional study was carried out in disease, while about 56% to 70% did not
Uchapally village of Andhra Pradesh to know the associate abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting
cause of endemic kidney damage. as symptoms of foodborne diseases. The
reported prevalence of foodborne diseases was Chronic kidney disease staging was done 13.2% at household level and 3% at the according to MDRD formula (Internet version). community level.As per the formula all the subjects in Group A
With reference to drug quality, the study were in different stages of kidney disease. Of
revealed that most of the respondents (84%) them, about 81% were in stage 4 and 13% were
claim to consult qualified doctor and 80% stated in stage 5 of chronic kidney disease. Similarly,
that their pharmacists insist on doctors' about 80% of the subjects in Group B were also
prescription. About 66% of the respondents buy in different stages of kidney disease, with 40% in
drugs in packed condition and 46% check the stage 2 followed by 20% in stage 3 and 10% in
expiry date. About 63% on an average are aware stage 4 of chronic kidney disease.
of disposable syringes and out of them atleast
The higher proportion of osteosclerosis, 75% insist on use of disposable syringes and
secondary to kidney damage may be due to high needles.  Based on the findings of the survey, the
levels of strontium and silica in ground water, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is
which is the only drinking water source in the developing intervention strategies to ensure total
village. food and drug safety in the country.
6.1.2. Multicentric study on analysis of
6.1.3. Capacity Building Project on Food
6.1.1.Exploratory study on kidney disease
cages like bedding, feed and water.  There was
an increase in the incidence of air-borne
organisms, which is expected to be reduced
once the renovation of the facilities is taken up.
The renovation of the animal facilities has Plant foods are rich in non-nutrients, started and it is expected to be completed in 9-10 phytochemicals and some of them are months. Efforts to establish a 'National Animal extensively used in traditional medicine to treat Resource Facility' at the Genome Valley, some common ailments. Incidence of non- Turkapally, Hyderabad, gathered momentum communicable diseases is on the rise and with the registration of 102 acres of land gifted by require management of diseased state the state government in favour of ICMR. The alongside treatment.  Spices / condiments used proposal is with the planning commission and in Indian diet can help in preventing some of the the budgetary requirement is projected to be complications associated with long duration of Rs.244.34 crores for five years.diseased state.  Allium vegetables like garlic and
onions are known to posses many medicinal
properties. Diallyl sulphide (DAS), one of the The centre supplied animals and extended major chemical constituent is known to technical help for conducting 8 IAEC approved contribute to antioxidant property of garlic. In this regular animal experiments of  the Institute. It study, antiatherogenic potential of diallyl also extended help to Pre-clinical Toxicology sulphide was assessed by measuring the ADP Centre, and evaluation of proprietary peptide induced platelet aggregation in the presence and molecule Genopep I and II were completed in absence of DAS using blood samples obtained mice, rabbits and the report was submitted to from diabetic subjects.  There was significant sponsor. Studies in tetravalent vaccine supplied reduction in platelet aggregation by DAS. The by Indian immunologicals have been initiated results suggest that regular intake of garlic this year. through diet may be helpful in reducing one of the
secondary complications in diabetes mellitus. With the registration of primate facilities
during the period, the requests for conducting
experiments in monkey from other Institutions
(Private and Government), especially for
The Centre carries out both service as well pharmacokinetics studies can now be
as basic research activities. It also extends entertained.
research support to the Institute in terms of
Breeding and supply of animals, supply of
blood/sera from animals are some of  the major In the recent past, with the development of
service activities of  the centre.  The supply of biotech products, DNA vaccines, plant products,
animals increased by 20% this year and drugs, chemicals, genetically modified foods etc.
correspondingly there was an increase of 20% using indigenous technology, the clinical use of
income compared to the previous year.  It was such products requires methodology develop-
also true for the supply of stock animal feed, ment specially for their safety evaluation both at
which showed an increase of 36%. There was lot pre-clinical and clinical levels. In view of this,
of enquiries for experimental animal feeds and ICMR has established a Centre for Advanced
the centre supplied 458.25 kg of need based Research for Pre-clinical Toxicology at NIN in the
diets. The centre continued to supply blood/sera year 2000 and with financial support for a period
from various laboratory animals to several of 5 years to conduct safety studies (pre-clinical
institutes. toxicology data) especially for biotech products
and other pharmaceuticals.Routine microbiological health monitoring
was carried out in randomly selected animals as The centre has not only got the recognition at
well as in accessory items entering the animal national level, but has generated scientific data
as well as financial turnover to the tune of Rs.1.5
crore. Among the various important programmes
undertaken, Non-clinical toxicity studies of
ATTENUATED SA-14-14-2), Safety evaluation
of Proprietary peptide molecules as anti cancer
The pre-clinical toxicological testing of agents, Pre-Clinical Toxicity Evaluation of
Japanese Encephalitis Vaccine (JE) and Ayurvedic Bhasmas (herbo-mineral prepa-
Genopep 1 which was developed for use as rations) have been reported in 2005 - 06. The
anticancer drug has been completed. The center also has conducted brain storming
neurovirulence was negative with administration sessions and became a centre for developing
of JE vaccine by intratheal suggesting its safety human resources whose services are needed
under conditions of acute exposure. Sub-chronic for various industrial sectors. In appreciation of
toxicity test indicated no abnormalities. The the efforts, the centre has received grant of
results were submitted to Ministry of Health, so Rs.2.5 crore from DST to upgrade the facility on
that phase I and phase II clinical trials can be par with International standards. In the current
taken up. The Genopep 1 showed no abnormal year, efforts are being made to get the GLP
toxicity except for mild genotoxicity in rats.accreditation.
8.2 Non-clinical toxicity studies of Japanese