SOURCE: NIN
URL: https://www.nin.res.in/downloads/NN Jan 16.pdf
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Knowledge and Practices of Using Food Label Information
India has the largest adolescent population (20%) in
the world and these 10 to 19 year olds constitute 243 1
million of India's 1.2 billion population.  About 10% to
15% of adolescents in urban areas in India are 2-4
overweight or obese.  Although there are many
reasons for an increase in the prevalence of obesity,
frequent consumption of unhealthy processed foods
is an important risk factor. Consumption of
nontraditional fast foods, processed foods, and
packaged foods has been increasing in India at a
rapid pace, and more so among adolescents and 5,6
children in urban areas.  Over the past 20 years,
there has been an almost 300% rise in consumption
of packaged foods in developing countries such as 7,8
India.  In the current scenario, when there are shifts
from homemade to prepackaged foods, food labeling
could serve as a population-based approach to help 9,10
The Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM) states that
information can persuade via 2 different routes:
central and peripheral. With the central route, the
person draws on experience and knowledge to
scrutinize information and generate favorable and/or
unfavorable responses. Central route processing
occurs when an individual has high involvement with
the topic (ie, the topic is personally relevant) and has
an ability to evaluate the information. Because, food
labels can display nutrition information and symbols,
which serve as central and peripheral cues
respectively, labels can be potentially powerful tools
of communication to persuade consumers to make
Considering that regulations in India make it
mandatory for food labels to display nutrition
information along with the manufacturing, expiration,
and ‘best before’ dates, as well as ingredients,
creating awareness about the use of label information
among young consumers can enhance their skills in 13,16
choosing healthy foods.  Schools not only provide
viable platforms to reach a large segment of children,
but also offer the advantage of carrying out education
interventions within the context of the child's natural 14,15
environment.  This study was conducted to gather
information about the packaged foods that
adolescents usually purchase, and to assess their
current knowledge and practice of reading food labels
as well as the extent to which they use this information
A cross-sectional study was conducted among
adolescents attending schools in Kolkata, a
metropolitan city in the West Bengal State of India.
Two schools from each of the 3 natural zones (South,
Central, and North) of Kolkata city were randomly
selected using cluster sampling. In each zone, 1
government and 1 private school were selected, for a
total of 6 schools. The government and private
schools were selected to represent different
economic strata. All children in eighth grade (N=316)
A pre-coded, closed-ended questionnaire was used
to assess the knowledge and practices of
adolescents. The questionnaire was pre-tested
among 17 children. Based on the pre-test, minor
modifications were carried out in certain questions.
Because the students were not able to respond to the
questions about quality symbols, the authors decided
to show pictures of these logos along with the
corresponding questions while administering the
questionnaire. The final questionnaire had 23
Ñðð÷æðÂð çðÙððµððÜÜðæ¾àóÚð Ñðð÷æðÂð çðüçÆððÐð
questions spread across 5 major sections: (i) socio-
demographic details of the participants (10
questions), (ii) the purchase of packaged foods and
frequently purchased or consumed packaged foods
(2 questions) (iii) how food label information was read
(3 questions), (iv) knowledge about symbols on food
labels (3 questions), and (v) opinions on the
usefulness of food labels (5 questions).
Each question was read out to participants by the
investigator, who also showed the relevant pictures
when dealing with questions related to symbols on
food labels. The authors checked the data for
consistency before entering them for analysis.
Descriptive statistics, frequency distributions, and
cross tabulations were performed, and chi-square
test was used to assess the significance of
associations between variables at 95% confidence
Of the 316 respondents, 148 were boys and 168 were
girls. Most respondents were from Government
schools; the rest were from private schools. The
students were in the age group of 13-16 years.
Approximately 9% of participants were from a lower
socioeconomic group (as per National Sample
Survey Organization categorization); while others
were either from middle or higher socioeconomic
groups. Most respondents (297 of 316) reported that
they purchase and/or consume packaged foods.
Therefore, the results presented below are based on
Among those who purchased packaged foods, a
majority reported that they consume almost all foods
listed in the questionnaire. Among the ready-to-cook
and ready-to-use foods, biscuits (94.6%), beverages
(89.9%), snacks (88.6%), instant noodles (87%) and
health drinks (86.7%) were most commonly
Of those who bought packaged foods, 88% claimed
to read food labels. Only about a third of them always
checked food labels, and over half sometimes
checked food labels. However, about three quarters
of those who read labels always or sometimes read
the date of manufacture and expiration dates,
whereas fewer participants read the ‘best before’ date
(Table 1). When asked about their perception
regarding the safety of the foods after the ‘best before’
and expiration dates, over a half of respondents
Packed Foods Purchased and/or Consumed by
thought that it was safe to foods after the best used
before date, and 66% knew that it would be unsafe to
consume foods after the date of expiration. Among
those who read labels, only half reported that they
always or sometimes checked for ingredients; the rest
When asked about the habit of reading nutrient
information on labels, less than one fifth of
adolescents who read food labels reported that they
checked the fat, sugar, salt, and cholesterol content of
the foods, whereas only one tenth read information
about fiber content. When asked about allergens,
only about 10% reported that they always read this
A majority of the students could recognize the Indian
Standard Institute (ISI) symbol (a quality symbol
issued by the Bureau of Indian Standards, which can
be voluntarily procured by manufacturers of certain
foods and it is compulsory on labels of bottled water);
however, only about one fifth of them knew on what
kind of foods it could be seen. When asked whether
this symbol was mandatory or voluntary for food
products, only 12% of those who claimed to know the
symbol answered correctly, saying that it was not a
Nutrition Facts and Allergen Information
Table 1. School-Attending Adolescents (10–19 Years of Age)
From Kolkata, India, Who Read Labels and Manufacture,
Expiration, and Best Used Before Dates (n = 297)
Figure 1. Percentage of school-attending adolescents (10–19
years of age) from Kolkata, India, who read nutritional content
n=297. Veg./Non-veg. indicates Vegetable/Non-vegetable.
mandatory symbol. When asked about Agricultural
voluntary quality symbol on agricultural products
such as spices, flours, and oils), over one quarter of
the total respondents recognized the symbol,
whereas only 9.5% knew on which foods it could be
found, and a majority (80%) did not know whether it
When the researchers showed the respondents the
symbol of a brown dot in a brown box, a majority
(72%) claimed that they recognized the symbol;
however, less than half knew that it indicated the
presence of a non-vegetarian ingredient in the food.
Of the 78% who claimed to recognize the green dot in
a green box, only a half knew that it was a symbol
indicating that the food was vegetarian. Only 40% of
adolescents knew that these symbols were
About a half of the adolescents considered labels
useful for making food choices, and one third of them
thought that the labels were sometimes useful; 6%
thought that the label information was not useful for
choosing foods. When asked about their perception
regarding the usefulness of the information on labels,
over 44% reported that it was adequate, 15% thought
that there was not enough label information, and 13%
thought that there was too much. At least one fifth of
all respondents thought the information was too
More than one third of students responded that they
would prefer images or symbols rather than the
current format of a text-intensive food label (as
opposed to 11%, who preferred the current form).
About one third of students preferred symbol-based
labels only for unhealthy foods. No significant (P>
.69) differences were found in the label-reading
practices of girls and boys; 87% of male respondents
and 89% of female respondents claimed to read food
No significant (P>.05) association was found
between the parents' education and the child's habit
of reading food labels. Interestingly, significantly
(P<.001) fewer adolescents whose parents were
educated only to primary school checked labels,
compared with those who had illiterate or better-
Opinion About the Usefulness of Food Labels
Label Format and Effect of Gender Differences
Parents' Education and Adolescents' Label-
The results of this study show that reading food labels
was reported to be a common habit among most of
the adolescents. However, many of them appeared to
be concerned only about the shelf life or safety of the
product, because they reported that they read
information related to the ‘date of manufacture’ or
‘expiration’ or ‘best before’ date. Fewer adolescents
read ingredients and nutrition information on the
labels. The most frequently purchased packaged
foods among school-going adolescents in Kolkata
were reported to be instant foods, candy, beverages,
and so forth. Similar findings were reported in an
earlier study conducted in Hyderabad, a metropolitan 16
Earlier studies in India reported a direct  association
between consumers' education level and their
practices of reading and understanding text-based 15,17,18
food labels. In the current study considerably
higher proportion of respondents read food labels
than those reported in previous studies from 17,18,19
India . This could be because all respondents in
the current study were students who had a certain
level of education. However, no association was
found between the level of parents' education and
children's habit of reading labels. This is contrary to
the views that parental education could be an
important mediating factor in influencing adolescents' 20,21
food shopping and use of food labels.  In India,
there has been a steep rise in the consumption of
packaged foods only in the past few decades, with
many youths and adolescents as a large proportion of 21
consumers.  Because this is a recent trend, there is
hardly any possibility for parents educating the
current generation about these aspects. It indicates a
transition among adolescents from having minimal
control over food shopping and choices to being in
Although Huang et. al.  reported that label reading
does not necessarily translate into a healthier diet for
adolescents, there is general concurrence that prior
exposure to nutrition education, health conscious-
ness, and a belief in the importance of a low-fat or low-
calorie diet can have a major influence on label use 22-25
behaviors.  In this study, less than 20% of
adolescents reported that they checked nutrition
information and fat, sugar, and cholesterol content;
however, no attempt was made to correlate these with
adolescents' nutrition knowledge or nutritional status
because that was beyond the scope of this study.
A higher proportion of the respondents recognized
the ISI symbol than the AGMARK symbol. The reason
is that AGMARK is a quality symbol that is likely to be
Nutrition News - a quarterly publication produced by the
National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR), P.B.No.718, Jamai-Osmania PO, Hyderabad-500 007, TS, INDIA
present on products such as honey, ghee, spices,
flour, and vegetable oil, which the adolescents
seldom buy, whereas, ISI is seen on ready-to-eat
foods & carbonated beverages and juices, which are 4,16
consumed by a large proportion of adolescents.
Applying the ELM model of persuasion, it can be
argued that the display of ingredients or nutrition
information acts as a central cue and the consumers
need basic nutrition literacy to invoke reasoning and 26
assess the health effects of the food.  Therefore,
poor comprehension of labels could be attributed to
Although 95% of packaged food products comply with
labeling regulation in India, whether consumers
understand the label information is still question-12
able . In the current study, more than half of
respondents thought that labels were confusing or
had too much information. Therefore, increasing
consumer education rather than just enhancing
access to nutrition information on labels can assist
adolescent consumers in making decisions about
food purchases. This also calls for reconsideration of
the text-based information display. Because about
70% of the respondents indicated a preference for
changing existing informational display patterns on
the labels, there may be a need to experiment with
alternative methods, such as color or quality coding,
traffic light systems, and so forth, and to assess their
impact on the food choices of adolescent consumers.
This cross-sectional study adds to understanding of
the use of label information in this important group.
This study offers a unique contribution to the existing
literature on consumer use of food labels, because it
assessed the knowledge and use of food labels
2011/pdfs/SOWC-2011-Main-Reportchapter- 2_12082010.pdf. Accessed on
2. Misra A, Khurana L. The metabolic syndrome in South Asians: epidemiology,
determinants, and prevention. Metab Syndr Relat D. 2009;7:497-514.
3.  Wang Y, Chen HJ, Shaikh S, Mathur P. Is obesity becoming a public health
problem in India? Examine the shift from under- to over-nutrition problems over
4. Laxmaih A, Balakrishna N, Kumar S, Ravindranath M, Brahmam GNV,
Sesikeran B. Prevalence and Determinants of Overweight and Obesity Among
12-17 Year Old Urban Adolescents in Andhra Pradesh. Hyderabad, India:
National Institute of Nutrition in collaboration with WHO–India Office; 2007.
5. Wasir JS, Misra A. The metabolic syndrome in Asian Indian: the impact of
nutritional and socio- economic transition in India. Metab Syndr Relat D.
6. Misra A, Khurana L. Obesity and metabolic syndrome in developing countries. J
Clin Endocr Metab. 2008;93(suppl 1): S9-S30.
7. Procter KL. The etiology of childhood obesity: a review. Nutr Res Rev. 2007;
8. St-Onge MP, Keller KL, Heymsfield SB. Changes in childhood food
consumption pattern: a cause for concern in light of increasing body weight. Am
9. Jessie A. Food nutrition label use in associated with demographic, behavioral and
psychological factors and dietary intake among African American in north
California. J Am Diet Assoc. 2005;105:392-402.
10. Goldberg JP. Nutrition and health communication: the message and the media
over half a century. Nutr Rev. 1992;50:71-77.
11. Food Safety and Standards Regulations, 2011. Food Safety and Standards
and %20 standards%20 (Packaging %20and%20Labelling) %20regulation, %
12. Laxmaiah A, Sudershan RV, Subba  Rao GM, Brahmam GNV. Current Scenario
of Food Labelling in India—A Report. Submitted to WHO–India Country Office,
New Delhi. Hyderabad, India: National Institute of Nutrition; 2009.
13. Cowburn G, Stockley L. Consumer understanding and use of nutrition labelling:
a systematic review. Public Health Nutr. 2005;8:21-28.
14. SubbaRao GM, Vijayapushpam T, Venkaiah K, Pavarala V. Quantitative and
qualitative analysis of nutrition and food safety information in school science
textbooks of India. Health Educ J. 2012;71:725-735.
15. Gavaravarapu SR, Vemula SR, Rao P, Rao MV, Polasa K. Focus group studies
on food safety knowledge, perceptions, and practices of school-going
adolescent girls in South India. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2009;41:340-346.
16. Rao DR, Vijayapushpam T, SubbaRao GM, Antony GM, Sarma KV. Dietary
habit and effects of two different education tool on nutrition knowledge of school
going adolescents' girls in Hyderabad, India. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2007;61: 1081-
17. Polasa K, Sudershan RV, Subba Rao GM, Rao P, Vishnu Vardhana Rao M,
Sivakumar B. National Report on Knowledge, Attitudes, Beliefs and Practices
(KABP) Study on Food Safety in India. Hyderabad, India: National Institute of
18. Sudershan RV, SubbaRao GM, Rao P, Rao MV, Polasa K. Food safety related
perceptions and practices of mothers- A case study in Hyderabad, India. Food
19. Misra R. Knowledge, attitudes and label use among college students. J Am Diet
20. McCullum C, Achterberg CL. Food shopping and label use behavior among
high school-aged adolescents. J Adolescence. 1997;32:181-197.
21. Ali J, Kapoor S. Understanding consumer prospective on food labelling in India.
22. Huang TT, Kaur H, McCarter KS, Nazir N, Choi WS, Ahluwalia JS. Reading
nutrition labels and fat consumption in adolescents. J Adolesc Health.
23. McLean-Meyinsse PE, Gager JV, Cole DN. Examining the prevalence of food
label use by university students.J Food Distribution. 2011;42:84-86.
24. Gerand M. Does calorie information promote lower calorie fast food choices
among college students? J Adolesc Health. 2009;44:84-86.
25. Satia JA, Galanko JA, Neuhouser ML. Food nutrition label use is associated
with demographic, behavioral, and psychosocial factors and dietary intake
among African Americans in North Carolina. J Am Diet Assoc. 2005;105: 392-
26. Maubach N, Hoek J. The effect of alternative nutrition information formats on
consumers' evaluations of a children's breakfast cereal. In: Proceedings of
Partnerships, Proof and Practice-International Non-profit and Social Marketing