SOURCE: NIN
URL: https://www.nin.res.in/researchhighlights/2003-04.pdf
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Being at the forefront of Nutrition Research in the country, the research endeavours of National
Institute of Nutrition (NIN) encompassed a wide range of areas in food and nutrition related issues of
national importance. The problems that have been dogging the nutritional well-being of population an d
the emerging epidemiological issues were given considerable importance. While some clinical studies laid
emphasis on issues like osteoporosis among women, the lab-based studies looked into a plethora of areas
such as, molecular mechanisms of cataract, insulin resistance, ageing process, food compositions, cancer
and xenobiotics. On the other hand, efforts were initiated to start a National Dried Blood Spot Facility for
vitamin A estimation at NIN, while the community studies looked into different aspects of public hea lth
interest like the prevalence of micronutrient deficiencies, iodine deficiency disorders, nutritional  status of
population in drought-hit states and adolescent obesity.
Several States in India have been experiencing recurring drought conditions during the past few
years. The year 2002-03 was no different for many states. On a request from the Ministry of Agricult ure,
a survey was carried out in nine drought-hit states to assess the impact of drought on diet and nutritional
status of the community during May-June 2003.  The mean intakes of foodstuffs in almost all the stat es
were low and the households in all these states were not meeting the recommended levels of cereals and
millets. Food Security was also not too encouraging among the households. The survey also found that the
prevalence of underweight among pre-schools children was more than 50% in all these states, while
prevalence of chronic energy deficiency ranged between 26% and 49% among males and 30% and 51%
A large scale, eight-state community based survey was carried out to study the prevalence of
micronutrient deficiency disorders involving both clinical and biochemical forms of vitamin A defici ency
(Bitot’s spots), iodine deficiency disorders and iron deficiency anaemia during this year . The overall prevalence
of Bitot’s spots was 0.8% and total goiter was 4% (below the WHO cut-off level of 5% to indicate endemicity).
About 42% of the households were using non-iodized salt. It was largely lactating and pregnant women ,
adolescent girls and pre-school children who were found to be affected by anaemia. While IDD registered
a decline well below the epidemic level, vitamin A deficiency continued to be a matter of public hea lth
concern in many states. The results underscore the need to strengthen the existing national nutritio n
programmes as well as nutrition education component embedded in them.
An earlier country-wide survey carried out to assess the changes in the prevalence of IDD particularly
in the districts with higher levels of endemicity has revealed that the overall prevalence of total goiter
registered a significant decline from 14-69% during 1984-94 to 3-40% this year, especially in the North-
The fact that prevalence of obesity among adolescents is increasing, attracted attention and prompted
a study to assess the prevalence of over-weight and obesity in urban adolescent school children. The study
proved that the prevalence was higher among urban school children than their rural counterparts.
Yet another study established that consumption of breakfast was an important factor affecting
cognitive functions especially attention concentration and immediate recall memory of the students. At the
same time, it was also observed that the academic performance of regular breakfast eaters was better
Osteopororsis results in increased bone fragility and may lead to fracture of spine, hip and arm
which is both an active as well as an early symptom. Research findings have revealed that Indian women
experience early onset of osteoporosis as compared to their Western counterparts. Hence, they are more
Most of the Indian women belonging to the underprivileged sections of the society subsist on a diet
low in calories, proteins as well as calcium. These women are seen to breastfeed their infants for prolonged
period of time (>1 year). It is possible that their dietary calcium is inadequate for bone accretion during the
recovery period and hence there may be a mobilization of calcium from mother’s skeleton leading to
transient reduction in bone mineral density (BMD). Studies are being carried out to establish peak B MD
reference values for both men and women and also to assess the prevalence of osteopenia and osteoporosis
in Indian population groups in a multicentric ICMR Task Force Study. Another study is being conducted to
assess the extent of loss of bone mass during post-partum period and also to find out if low calcium intakes
are adequate for restoration of bone density. Conservation of calcium seemed to occur either through
increased absorption or reduced excretion, or both. These compensatory mechanisms were observed to
offset the breast milk calcium loss only in those women who enjoyed better nutritional status (in te rms of
body weights and BMI). The link between body weight and BMI with peak bone mass will be explored in
Assessment of vitamin A status in the population groups is a prerequisite to successful prevention
and control of vitamin A deficiency disorders. A technology using the process of collecting dried blood spot
(DBS) on filter paper and later analyzing for vitamin A using HPLC has been developed and made available
at NIN. This National Facility was initiated with the support from Micronutrient Initiative and MOST, New
The enzyme, aldose reductase (AR) in lens has been a drug target because of its involvement in the
development of secondary complications of diabetes including cataract. A study was carried out to assess
the inhibition of AR by the constituents of Emblica officinalis in vitro and in lens organ culture. It was found
that aqueous extract of E.officinalis inhibited rat lens AR and recombinant human AR. The hydrolysab le
tannoids of E. officinalis were found to be responsible for AR inhibition. In an alternative approac h,
antiglycating agents (MAB1) have been worked out for delaying the onset of opacification of lens.
A study was carried out to assess the effect of calorie restriction with/without micronutrient deficiency
on oxidative stress and ageing. The findings of the study established the beneficial effect of calorie restriction
per se in protecting animals against oxidative stress and hyperinsulinemia.
Resistin, a cysteine rich adipocytokine, has shown to be implicated as a link between obesity and
type 2 diabetes in mouse. Role of resistin in human was debatable. A study was carried out to characterize
the structure of human resistin which revealed a reversible shift in secondary structure as a functi on of
concentration and time. The level of expression of resistin gene in human will modulate the higher o rder
structure and by implication its function.
Studies were carried out to investigate the effects of increasing dietary long chain n-3 PUFA from
fish oil on membrane lipid composition and insulin sensitivity in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue  of
sucrose induced insulin-resistant rats. The results showed that replacement of 0.5en% long chain n-3
PUFA (n-6/n-3 ratio = 10) prevented sucrose induced insulin resistance by increasing peripheral insu lin
IV. FOOD COMPOSITION AND NUTRIENT AVAILABILITY
Rice, being the staple food in many parts of India, research guidelines for improvements in yield is
an important process. As a result, new varieties are produced by the scientists and subsequently they enter
the markets. The protein quality depends on their essential amino acid composition, hence a study wa s
conducted on varieties of rice by analysing them for protein and amino acids content before and afte r
polishing and were compared to the values documented in NIN’s publication Nutritive Value of Indian
Foods (NVIF). Results indicated that 8-10% polishing of rice decreased protein content by about 5%. In
most cases, it was observed that the protein values of new rice varieties were higher than the earlier values
reported in NVIF , with out any change in lysine content.
Antimutagenic and antigenotoxic potential of ginger was clearly established in a study. Another
study was conducted on the patients suffering from upper gastrointestinal tract cancers. Estimation of in
vivo nitrosation potential after administering proline was carried out. The metabolites of nitroproline were
In the field of social drug epidemiology, an educational intervention strategy comprising both print
and traditional folk-form in Andhra Pradesh (Harikatha) was used to sensitize general public on the issues
of Rational Usage of Drugs. Also, a rapid screening procedure ( in vitro and in vivo) was developed to
assess the antioxidant activity of some herbal medicines.
The institute is frequently approached by various agencies including governmental organizations
to carry out community-based studies on public health issues. A rapid survey carried out in the villages of
Bhandara district of Madhya Pradesh has revealed that several people were affected with toxicity-rel ated
illness on consuming Khesari dal (Lathyrus sativus). Another study in the tribal districts of Orissa  showed
that food samples were contaminated with aflatoxins and some other heavy metals including lead, cadmium,
arsenic and mercury. In yet another study carried out in some villages of Nawadha district of Bihar, it was
found that high fluoride concentration in drinking water was leading to vitamin D deficiency causing bone
deformities in young children.  Appropriate strategies to combat the problem were suggested.
A study was carried out to determine the effect of vitamin A restriction and supplementation on
drug induced apoptosis of rat intestinal mucosal cells. It was observed that riboflavin and folic ac id
supplementation helps in preventing DNA damage, mutations and the occurrence of cancer as well as
chemotherapy restricted adverse effects.
DNA finger printing of the obese mutant rats using random primers yielded a fairly constant DNA
fingerprint for the GR-Ob strain. Similar pattern was not found in WNIN/Ob strain and hence alternative
techniques to obtain results are being explored. Also, genetic typing of obese mutant rats using microsatellite
markers was carried out. Out of 100 markers proposed to be screened, 60 primers spanning a majority
The existing Pre-clinical Toxicology expertise in the Institute gained new emphasis and continued to
carry out various service activities assigned to it. A research study was also taken up to carry out  toxicity
and allergenicity evaluation of recombinant Hepatitis B vaccine in mice and guinea pigs.
Thus research studies carried out in a wide array of fields epitomise the Institute’s consistent zest in
exploring newer frontiers in the filed of nutrition, while addressing the current issues in a holistic approach.
These research achievements would not have been possible without the co-operation extended by all the
staff of NIN, with whose unstinted support the institute forges ahead to face newer challenges.