SOURCE: NIN
URL: https://www.nin.res.in/researchhighlights/2002-03.pdf
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

different geographical regions of the country
were probed in detail this year. Uttar Pradesh was
surveyed this year to assess the dietary intakes
and nutritional status of rural community. North-
Eastern India was also the focus of research
studies as certain aspects of  endemic goitre
were investigated and also certain medicinal
plants were analyzed for their antioxidant activities.
A series of studies on food fortification and trace
minerals were carried out as part of basic
studies. Also, this year, some new studies
xenobiotics,  food safety and extension and
training. In the realm of clinical studies, the
correlation between women’s work and bone
health was worked out. Here are the highlights of
the research studies carried out during the year.
1.1.  Nutrition profile of Indians – A districtlevel
rural community in 63 districts of Uttar Pradesh
revealed that the average intake at the State level
of cereals & millets and pulses was satisfactory,
while that of milk, sugar & jaggery was less than
the recommended  dietary allowance s. The
mean intake of all the   nutrients except
energy, protein and calcium was less than the
RDA. Only about 64% of the households were
consuming adequate amount of both energy
and protein. In general, about 52% preschool
children were undernourished (weight for age <
Median – 2SD). The prevalence was >50% in 34
of the 63 districts surveyed. About 42% of adult
males and 34% of  females had chronic energy
adopted during exercise, are recommended for
bone density improvement. However the stimu-
lation of bone turnover during prolonged bone
loading postures in the absence of calcium
intakes might prove to be deleterious for bone
calcium intakes standing or standing with
load  bearing/bending postures are better for hip
densities when compared to the sitting postures
at work. However,  in the case of the spine,
standing and bending postures significantly
reduce bone densities at the spine, but sitting
postures do not worsen the spine bone densities.
Using the WHO classification for diagnosis of
osteoporosis, the onset of bone changes around
40 years of age in the low socio-economic group
were seen in spine  (-2.27), hip (-1.7), forearm
(-1.53) in this order. All the women from the low
socio-economic (LSE) group have increased
osteoclastic activity (indicated by acid phos-
phatase), but those with spinal osteoporotic
changes are worse off on all the biochemical
2.2.  Effect of tamarind on mobilization of
to be helpful in mobilizing deposited fluoride from
bone, by enhancing urinary excretion of fluo-
ride after  urinary fluoride was stabilized by
Food fortification is one of the important
strategies  accepted in the National Nutrit ion
Policy to achieve the goals of controlling anemia
in the country. Institute has made considerable
progress towards realizing this goal by devel-
3.1.Encapsulated source of iron was found to
fortified  ordinary common salt while the NIN
formulation, required high quality salt for
3.2 A  laboratory based technology for fortification
of whole-wheat flour  ‘atta’ with iron at 25 and 50
developed. The two indigenous sources of
iron that met the criteria as a chemical
source of iron were  anhydrous ferrous sulfate
and indigenous H-reduced iron powder. The
percent bioavailability  in  adult male  human
4.  NUTRIENT COMPOSITION OF NEW VARIETIES
composition. The protein content in general was
higher than 8 g as against 6.8g found earlier
(Nutritive Value of Indian Foods). In one of the
varieties, it was about 12g. Consumption of such
high protein rice could increase the protein intake
of individuals by 8 to 9 g/day. This perhaps
explains the gradual improvement in PEM status
in the country, despite little changes in Indian
5.1 Studies conducted on WNIN female rats have
micronutrient s tatus and predisposition of the
offspring to insulin resistance in later life.
5.2 In a yet another study on rats, it was found
that restriction of both dietary micronuteints
as well as calories had adverse effects on
fasting glucose & insulin and (Homeostasis
model of assessment insulin resistance) HOMA
IR index as compared to group with calorie
restriction alone. It was also found that
antioxidant status (Ferric reducing antioxidant
potential - FRAP) was better and oxidative
stress (Thio barbituric acid reactive substabces
- TBARs) low in rats of ‘calorie restricted’ group
as compared to calorie and micronutrient
restricted group. The results of this study
diet restriction  is in part due to improved
antioxidant status and / or enhanced protein
editing. The  effect of longterm restriction of
diet/food, protein and vitamin on the aggre-
chaperone activity in rat lens vis a vis
Food and protein restriction lowered the
susceptibility of  - and -crystallins towards
aggregation,  while  vitamin restriction
crystallins. Interestingly, only by vitamin restriction
improved chaperone activity of crystallin.
progression of cataract probably by modulating
oxidative stress and glycation. Aldose reductase
is important in diabetic cataractogenesis. Aldose
reductase inhibitors (ARI) are valuable in
delaying/preventing it. Screening of  extracts of
different plant foods indicates significant ARI
activity in the extracts of amla, bitter gourd, fruits
and Tulsi leaves. Curcumin appears to be the
most potent ARI. Curcumin inhibits AR in a non
competitive manner. Ongoing studies have
shown that extract of black tea - but not green
tea - significantly inhibited the glycation
(argpyrimidine formation) of purified bovine lens
- crystallin in vitro . Significant anti platelet
aggregation activity was also observed in water
extracts of eight varieties of green leafy
5.5. Dietary fatty acids and insulin resistance
Dietary fatty acids are known to affect the
risk of chronic diseases particularly of diabetes
and CVD. Adequate intake of essential PUFA
namely linoleic  (18:2n-6) and a-linolenic acids
(18:3n-3) and their optimal balance (n-6/n-3
ratio ~ 5-10) has been found necessary for
cardiovascular health. Studies were undertaken
to investigate the effects of dietary fatty acids
on membrane lipid composition and insulin
sensitivity in target tissue in experimental rats.
trans fatty acids (TFA) decreased insulin sensitivity
in target tissues (skeletal muscle and adipose
tissue).  The  effects of TFA were more marked
than SFA. The current evidence indicates that
the atherogenic  effects of TFA (increased LDL
cholesterol and  decreased HDL cholesterol)
can be prevented by   increasing dietary 18:2
n-6.  However, the present  studies show that
increasing dietary 18:2n-6 did not prevent the TFA
induced decrease in insulin sensitivity. On the other
hand, increasing dietary ALNA and therefore
decreasing n-6/n-3 ratio to 2 increased insulin
sensitivity in target tissues in diet induced
6. RESISTIN AS A MOLECUL AR LINK BETWEEN
genetic and environmental factors. Epide-
miological   observations  suggest  a  strong
patho-physiological association of obesity to
NIDDM. However, the  molecular link between
obesity and diabete s  remained to be resolved.
Resisitn, a cysteine-rich secretory protein,
identified from mouse adipocytes, is down- regulated
by anti-diabetic drugs like thiazolidinediones
(TZDs). Association of resistin with diabetes and
obesity in human system has been controversial
as opposed to the murine system. Thus, it appears
that mouse and human differ resistens greatly
not only in their  sequence and structure but in
their regulation and thus function. The physi-
ological role of resistin in  diabetes and obesity
can be better understood with knowledge about
The genomic counterpart of resistin encom-
passing the transcriptional start and translational
sequencer. Exon/intron boundries of mouse
and human were  demarcated using DIALIGN
1. The mouse sequence has an additional intron
of 2279 bp (intron X), which is absent in
human resistin. In silico analysis revealed a
number of transcription factor binding sites.
2. Of particular importance was the presence
of PPAR responsive element (PPRE) along with
the binding sites for other transcription fac-
3. The binding of PPAR/RXR complex to PPRE
present on intron X was shown by gel shift
4. Functional relevance of this DNA-protein
sient transfection assays using luciferase as
The typical characteristics of the recombinant
7.1 Application of Hazard Analysis Critical
Control Point (HACCP) to animal products
microbial hazards. A study on  HACCP  was
carried  out  in  prawns.  The  samples  were
found  to  be  contaminated with pathogenic
microorganisms immediately after harvest and
also at the market place. However, recipes
prepared from prawn were free from patho-
genic organisms. While pond water s amples
including Vibrio sp., feed and ice samples used
for preserving were free from pathogenic organisms.
Every step in food chain has to be thoroughly
investigated for identifying the source of
contamination to ensure food quality and
safety. The significance of the present study is
that the pond water is the source of con-
tami nation. Hence, HACCP need to be practiced
during the entire food chain from pond to plate
and not only at the export processing units.
7.2. U tiliz atio n o f  mo uldy  so rghum
A study was conducted to assess the fea-
sibility of utilizing lactic acid bacteria, through
natural fermentation, to detoxify  contami-
nated sorghum and convert it to a value added
animal feed ingredient. The laboratory trial of
production of  Lactobacillus  fermentation of
mouldy sorghum with addition of locally avail-
able resources (e.g. Casia tora  seeds) was
tested at village level by feeding it to cattle.
This is a preliminary study, and the acceptabil-
ity was monitored in terms of feed consump-
tion, which was correlated with milk output.
A study was conducted to establish in vivo
model to assess genotoxicity and evaluate the
antimutagenicity of feeding allium through diet.
Prior feeding of allium vegetables to rats reduced
the DNA damage in tissues and urinary mu-
been shown to inhibit carcinogenic process by
xenobiotic metabolism  enzymes, which play an
important role in detoxification pathway.  Spices and
their active principles have been shown to pos-
sess chemopreventing properties.  Study on
modulation of xenobiotic metabolism by  ginger
showed  that  ginger  feeding  to  rats  resulted  in
stimulation  of glutathione-s-transferase enzyme
in liver , intestine, lung and kidney suggesting that
regular  i ntake of ginger can enhance the
detoxification enzymes and thereby afford
protection to host against tissue damage
8.3. Effect of vitamin restriction and supplemen-
oxidative stress, decreasing the anti-apoptotic
protein (Bcl-2) expression thereby enhancing the
apoptotic rates while vitamin supplementation
reverses the changes caused by vitamin restriction.
Among the individual vitamins, vitamin E showed
maximum decrease in oxidative stress, as well
A total of 186 investigators from different
States in the country involved in the district
level RCH surveys were trained in 10 batches at
Nagpur , Bhubaneswar, Chennai and Hyderabad.
Orientation was provided on appropriate tech-
niques using finger prick blood samples for the
At the request of Food and Nutrition Board,
Department of Women and Child Development,
Government of India, ICDS functionaries from
North Eastern States were given orientation
training in organization and establishment of
10.1 R & D Supporting Service Activities
breeding and supply of microbiologically and
genetically  defined animals to various govern-
ment and private institutions.  Besides supply of
animals, blood and blood products were also
supplied to different institutions to meet their
specific R & D needs.  Additionally the Centre
was involved in supplying high quality animal
feed to different institutes.  All these service
activities resulted in generating a total income
of  Rs.31.75 lakhs.  The Centre trained a total of
50  candidates  in  various  aspects  of  laboratory
animals care, husbandry, nutrition, diseases,
welfare and ethical aspects of experimentation.
The Centre also extended technical consultancy
in the field of laboratory animal sciences and
technology for more than 20 institutions last year.
A preliminary project in collaboration with
ITRC, Lucknow on the effect of anorexigenic
glycoprotein known as “satiomem” isolated from
animal and plant membrane was tested in WNIN/
Ob rats.  The study confirmed the anorexigenic
property of  the compound shown earlier in normal
rats and mice.  However , the food intake reduction
in these genetically obese rats was only 20%,
compared to 40% seen earlier with normal rats.
At the level compound is fed to the rats, no
The study on the candidate gene involved
in obese rats was in collaboration with IISc.,
Bangalore . It comprehensively showed that leptin
receptor gene was not altered in these rats, as
per the evidence on coding regions as well as
m-RNA levels of  various splice variants of  the
initiated for genetic typing of  WNIN/Ob and
GR-Ob strains using micro-satellite markers.  These
markers span  all  the  22  chromosomes  (including
sex chromes)  of  the  rat and the mutants will be
typed along with the parental strain WNIN, related
strain WKY and unrelated strain Fischer 344.  Out
of 100 markers selected for the study (4 markers/
chromosomes), 22 markers were completed and
unique markers typical of  each strain could be
10.5. PCR based DNA fingerprinting in obese
random primers yielded an unique DNA finger
profile for homozygous obese rats which is
different from its other phenotypes and other
standard reference strains. This has been
10.6. Age associated oxidative stress in obese
Studies on oxidative stress in obese mutant
protein carboxylation to be high at the age of 3
months in cerebral hemispheres while the other
regions of the brain were affected only after 9
during IX five year plan period were continued
in the X plan period as they were perceived to
be of research  significance. New thrust areas
procured for the fresh projects during the year.
The research endeavours of the scientists and
the technicians were the major propellers of the
Ghafoorunissa        B.Sivakumar     K.Vijayaraghavan
NCLAS                                  NIN/FDTRC              NNMB