SOURCE: PUBMED
TOPIC: sugar cancer relationship evidence review
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

1. BMJ. 2023 Apr 5;381:e071609. doi: 10.1136/bmj-2022-071609.

Dietary sugar consumption and health: umbrella review.

Huang Y(1), Chen Z(1), Chen B(1), Li J(1), Yuan X(2), Li J(1), Wang W(3), Dai 
T(4), Chen H(5), Wang Y(5), Wang R(1), Wang P(1), Guo J(1), Dong Q(1), Liu C(6), 
Wei Q(1), Cao D(1), Liu L(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology/Institute of Urology, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.
(3)Chinese Evidence-based Medicine Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Nutrition, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(5)Research Core Facility, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.
(6)Department of Urologic Surgery, UC Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA, 
USA liuliangren@scu.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Urology/Institute of Urology, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, China liuliangren@scu.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2023 Jul;11(7):448-451. doi: 
10.1016/S2213-8587(23)00151-1.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the quality of evidence, potential biases, and validity 
of all available studies on dietary sugar consumption and health outcomes.
DESIGN: Umbrella review of existing meta-analyses.
DATA SOURCES: PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews, and hand searching of reference lists.
INCLUSION CRITERIA: Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of randomised 
controlled trials, cohort studies, case-control studies, or cross sectional 
studies that evaluated the effect of dietary sugar consumption on any health 
outcomes in humans free from acute or chronic diseases.
RESULTS: The search identified 73 meta-analyses and 83 health outcomes from 8601 
unique articles, including 74 unique outcomes in meta-analyses of observational 
studies and nine unique outcomes in meta-analyses of randomised controlled 
trials. Significant harmful associations between dietary sugar consumption and 
18 endocrine/metabolic outcomes, 10 cardiovascular outcomes, seven cancer 
outcomes, and 10 other outcomes (neuropsychiatric, dental, hepatic, osteal, and 
allergic) were detected. Moderate quality evidence suggested that the highest 
versus lowest dietary sugar consumption was associated with increased body 
weight (sugar sweetened beverages) (class IV evidence) and ectopic fatty 
accumulation (added sugars) (class IV evidence). Low quality evidence indicated 
that each serving/week increment of sugar sweetened beverage consumption was 
associated with a 4% higher risk of gout (class III evidence) and each 250 
mL/day increment of sugar sweetened beverage consumption was associated with a 
17% and 4% higher risk of coronary heart disease (class II evidence) and all 
cause mortality (class III evidence), respectively. In addition, low quality 
evidence suggested that every 25 g/day increment of fructose consumption was 
associated with a 22% higher risk of pancreatic cancer (class III evidence).
CONCLUSIONS: High dietary sugar consumption is generally more harmful than 
beneficial for health, especially in cardiometabolic disease. Reducing the 
consumption of free sugars or added sugars to below 25 g/day (approximately 6 
teaspoons/day) and limiting the consumption of sugar sweetened beverages to less 
than one serving/week (approximately 200-355 mL/week) are recommended to reduce 
the adverse effect of sugars on health.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42022300982.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj-2022-071609
PMCID: PMC10074550
PMID: 37019448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/disclosure-of-interest/ and 
declare: support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China and 
Program from the Department of Science and Technology of Sichuan Province for 
the submitted work; no financial relationship with any organisations that might 
have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three years; no other 
relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted 
work.


2. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2023 Mar;139:105369. doi:
10.1016/j.yrtph.2023.105369.  Epub 2023 Mar 3.

Non-sugar sweeteners and cancer: Toxicological and epidemiological evidence.

Pavanello S(1), Moretto A(2), La Vecchia C(3), Alicandro G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Thoracic Vascular Sciences and Public Health, 
Università degli Studi di Padova, Padua, Italy; University Hospital of Padova, 
Padua, Italy.
(2)Department of Cardiac Thoracic Vascular Sciences and Public Health, 
Università degli Studi di Padova, Padua, Italy; University Hospital of Padova, 
Padua, Italy. Electronic address: angelo.moretto@unipd.it.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Milan, Italy; Cystic Fibrosis Centre, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

Several toxicological and epidemiological studies were published during the last 
five decades on non-sugar sweeteners (NSS) and cancer. Despite the large amount 
of research, the issue still continues to be of interest. In this review, we 
provided a comprehensive quantitative review of the toxicological and 
epidemiological evidence on the possible relation between NSS and cancer. The 
toxicological section includes the evaluation of genotoxicity and 
carcinogenicity data for acesulfame K, advantame, aspartame, cyclamates, 
saccharin, steviol glycosides and sucralose. The epidemiological section 
includes the results of a systematic search of cohort and case-control studies. 
The majority of the 22 cohort studies and 46 case-control studies showed no 
associations. Some risks for bladder, pancreas and hematopoietic cancers found 
in a few studies were not confirmed in other studies. Based on the review of 
both the experimental data on genotoxicity or carcinogenicity of the specific 
NSS evaluated, and the epidemiological studies it can be concluded that there is 
no evidence of cancer risk associated to NSS consumption.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yrtph.2023.105369
PMID: 36870410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Melete srl provided financial 
support through a grant form ISA (International Sweeteners Association). The 
conclusions are those of the authors; the sponsors did not have any role in 
study design; in the collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the 
writing of the report; and in the decision to submit the article for 
publication.


3. Nutrients. 2022 Sep 15;14(18):3809. doi: 10.3390/nu14183809.

The Burden of Carbohydrates in Health and Disease.

Clemente-Suárez VJ(1)(2)(3), Mielgo-Ayuso J(4), Martín-Rodríguez A(1), 
Ramos-Campo DJ(5), Redondo-Flórez L(6), Tornero-Aguilera JF(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Sports Sciences, Universidad Europea de Madrid, Tajo Street, s/n, 
28670 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Grupo de Investigación en Cultura, Educación y Sociedad, Universidad de la 
Costa, Barranquilla 080002, Colombia.
(3)Studies Centre in Applied Combat (CESCA), 45007 Toledo, Spain.
(4)Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Burgos, 09001 Burgos, Spain.
(5)LFE Research Group, Department of Health and Human Performance, Faculty of 
Physical Activity and Sport Science-INEF, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 
28670 Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of Biomedical and Health Sciences, 
Universidad Europea de Madrid, C/Tajo, s/n, Villaviciosa de Odón, 28670 Madrid, 
Spain.

Foods high in carbohydrates are an important part of a healthy diet, since they 
provide the body with glucose to support bodily functions and physical activity. 
However, the abusive consumption of refined, simple, and low-quality 
carbohydrates has a direct implication on the physical and mental 
pathophysiology. Then, carbohydrate consumption is postulated as a crucial 
factor in the development of the main Western diseases of the 21st century. We 
conducted this narrative critical review using MedLine (Pubmed), Cochrane 
(Wiley), Embase, and CinAhl databases with the MeSH-compliant keywords: 
carbohydrates and evolution, development, phylogenetic, GUT, microbiota, stress, 
metabolic health, consumption behaviors, metabolic disease, cardiovascular 
disease, mental disease, anxiety, depression, cancer, chronic kidney failure, 
allergies, and asthma in order to analyze the impact of carbohydrates on health. 
Evidence suggests that carbohydrates, especially fiber, are beneficial for the 
well-being and growth of gut microorganisms and consequently for the host in 
this symbiotic relationship, producing microbial alterations a negative effect 
on mental health and different organic systems. In addition, evidence suggests a 
negative impact of simple carbohydrates and refined carbohydrates on mood 
categories, including alertness and tiredness, reinforcing a vicious circle. 
Regarding physical health, sugar intake can affect the development and prognosis 
of metabolic disease, as an uncontrolled intake of refined carbohydrates puts 
individuals at risk of developing metabolic syndrome and subsequently developing 
metabolic disease.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14183809
PMCID: PMC9505863
PMID: 36145184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


4. Front Oncol. 2023 May 5;13:1132306. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1132306.
eCollection  2023.

Risk factors for early-onset colorectal cancer: systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Hua H(1), Jiang Q(1), Sun P(1), Xu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nursing, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of early-onset colorectal cancer (EOCRC), which means 
colorectal cancer diagnosed in patients under 50 years, has been increasing 
around the world. However, the etiology remains unclear. This study aims to 
identify risk factors for EOCRC.
METHODS: This systematic review was conducted in PubMed, Embase, Scopus, and 
Cochrane Library databases from inception to November 25, 2022. We examined risk 
factors for EOCRC, including demographic factors, chronic conditions, and 
lifestyle behaviors or environmental factors. Random-effects/fixed-effects 
meta-analysis was adopted to combine effect estimates from published data. Study 
quality was evaluated with the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS). Statistical 
analysis was performed Revman5.3. Studies not suitable for the meta-analysis 
were analyzed by a systematic review.
RESULTS: A total of 36 studies were identified for this review, and 30 studies 
were included in the meta-analysis. Significant risk factors for EOCRC included 
male (OR=1.20; 95% CI, 1.08-1.33), Caucasian (OR=1.44; 95% CI, 1.15-1.80), a 
family history of CRC (OR=5.90; 95% CI, 3.67-9.48), inflammatory bowel disease 
(OR=4.43; 95% CI, 4.05-4.84), obesity (OR=1.52; 95%CI, 1.20-1.91), overweight 
(OR=1.18; 95% CI, 1.12-1.25), triglycerides (OR=1.12; 95% CI, 1, 08-1.18), 
hypertension (OR=1.16; 95% CI, 1.12-1.21), metabolic syndrome (OR=1.29; 95% CI, 
1.15-1.45), smoking (OR=1.44; 95% CI, 1.10-1.88), alcohol consumption (OR=1.41; 
95% CI, 1.22-1.62), a sedentary lifestyle (OR=1.24; 95% CI, 1.05-1.46), red meat 
(OR=1.10; 95% CI, 1.04-1.16), processed meat (OR=1.53; 95% CI, 1.13-2.06), 
Western dietary patterns (OR=1.43; 95% CI, 1.18-1.73) and sugar-sweetened 
beverages (OR=1.55; 95% CI, 1.23-1.95). However, no statistical differences were 
found for hyperlipidemia and hyperglycemia. Vitamin D may be a protective factor 
(OR=0.72; 95% CI, 0.56-0.92). There was considerable heterogeneity among studies 
(I2>60%).
CONCLUSIONS: The study provides an overview of the etiology and risk factors of 
EOCRC. Current evidence can provide baseline data for risk prediction models 
specific to EOCRC and risk-tailored screening strategies.

Copyright © 2023 Hua, Jiang, Sun and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1132306
PMCID: PMC10196487
PMID: 37213277

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


5. Nutr Cancer. 2022;74(9):3077-3095. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2022.2069827. Epub
2022  Apr 29.

Sugar-Sweetened Beverages and Cancer Risk: A Narrative Review.

Arroyo-Quiroz C(1), Brunauer R(2), Alavez S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana, 
Lerma de Villada, Mexico.
(2)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 
USA.
(3)Centro de Ciencias de la Complejidad (C3), Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México, México City, Mexico.

Cancer continues to be a major public health challenge worldwide, not only for 
being one of the leading causes of death but also because the number of incident 
cases is projected to grow in the next decades. Meanwhile, sugar-sweetened 
beverages (SSB) consumption has risen since the past century and constitutes a 
considerable fraction of added sugars in daily diet. Several studies have 
analyzed the relationship between SSB intake and health and found substantial 
evidence for effects on obesity, type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome. 
However, there is little knowledge about the relationship of SSB with cancer 
risk. It may be speculated that there is an indirect relationship between SSB 
and cancer through obesity and metabolic syndrome, but obesity-independent 
associations through hormonal imbalances or chronic inflammation could also 
exist. In this review, we describe the epidemiological evidence of the 
association of SSB and the risk of cancer in adults. Although the 
epidemiological evidence linking SSB consumption and cancer risk is still 
limited, prospective studies suggest that high SSB intake may increase the risk 
of obesity-related cancers, breast and prostate cancer.

DOI: 10.1080/01635581.2022.2069827
PMID: 35486421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Adv Nutr. 2021 Jun 1;12(3):809-849. doi: 10.1093/advances/nmaa147.

Intake of Various Food Groups and Risk of Breast Cancer: A Systematic Review and 
Dose-Response Meta-Analysis of Prospective Studies.

Kazemi A(1), Barati-Boldaji R(1), Soltani S(2), Mohammadipoor N(3), 
Esmaeilinezhad Z(1), Clark CCT(4), Babajafari S(1), Akbarzadeh M(3).

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran.
(2)Yazd Cardiovascular Research Center, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical 
Sciences, Yazd, Iran.
(3)Nurtition Research Center, School of Nutrition and Food Sciences, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(4)Centre for Intelligent Healthcare, Coventry University, Coventry, UK.

Despite increasing evidence for the association of food-based dietary patterns 
with breast cancer risk, knowledge about the shape of the relationship and the 
quality of meta-evidence are insufficient. We aimed to summarize the 
associations between food groups and risks of breast cancer. We performed a 
systematic literature search of the PubMed and Embase databases up to March 
2020. We included cohort, case-cohort, nested case-control studies, and 
follow-up studies of randomized controlled trials that investigated the 
relationship between breast cancer risk and at least 1 of the following food 
groups: red meat, processed meat, fish, poultry, egg, vegetables, fruit, dairy 
product (overall, milk, yogurt, and cheese), grains/cereals, nuts, legumes, soy, 
and sugar-sweetened beverages. Summary risk ratios (RRs) and 95% CIs were 
estimated using a random-effects model for linear and nonlinear relationships. 
Inverse linear associations were observed for vegetables (RR per 100 
g/d, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.95-0.99), fruit (RR per 100 g/d, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.95-0.99), 
cheese (RR per 30 g/d, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.91-1.00), and soy (RR per 30 
g/d, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.94-0.99), while positive associations were observed for red 
(RR per 100 g/d, 1.10; 95% CI, 1.03-1.18) and processed meat (RR per 50 
g/d, 1.18; 95% CI, 1.04-1.33). None of the other food groups were significantly 
associated with breast cancer risk. A nonlinear association was observed only 
for milk, such that the intake of >450 g/d increased the risk, while no 
association was observed for lower intake amounts. High intakes of vegetables, 
fruit, cheese, and soy products and low intakes of red and processed meat were 
associated with lower risks of breast cancer. However, causality cannot be 
inferred from these statistical correlations.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Society for Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1093/advances/nmaa147
PMCID: PMC8166564
PMID: 33271590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Diabetes Metab Syndr. 2024 Jul;18(7):103092. doi: 10.1016/j.dsx.2024.103092. 
Epub 2024 Jul 29.

Effect of stevia on blood glucose and HbA1C: A meta-analysis.

Zare M(1), Zeinalabedini M(2), Ebrahimpour-Koujan S(3), Bellissimo N(4), 
Azadbakht L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Nutrition, School of Nutritional Sciences and 
Dietetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic 
address: zaremarzie78@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Community Nutrition, School of Nutritional Sciences and 
Dietetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic 
address: Mobinazein@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Clinical Nutrition, School of Nutritional Sciences and 
Dietetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Cancer Research 
Center, Cancer Institute of Iran, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran. Electronic address: nutri.seam1@gmail.com.
(4)School of Nutrition, Toronto Metropolitan University, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
Electronic address: nick.bellissimo@torontomu.ca.
(5)Department of Community Nutrition, School of Nutritional Sciences and 
Dietetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Diabetes 
Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Department of Community 
Nutrition, School of Nutrition and Food Science, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. Electronic address: azadbakhtleila@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The study investigates substituting non-nutritive sweeteners (NNS) 
for sugar to address health concerns related to excess sugar intake. It 
specifically examines how stevia affects insulin and blood glucose levels. The 
systematic review and meta-analysis aim to evaluate stevia's impact on glycemic 
indices.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis following PRISMA 
guidelines, including 26 studies with 1439 participants. The PROSPERO 
registration number for this research is CRD42023414411. We systematically 
searched PubMed (MEDLINE), Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar. 
Additionally, we thoroughly reviewed the reference lists of the articles we 
extracted and relevant reviews. Two evaluators independently carried out 
screening, quality assessment, and data extraction. The GRADE (grading of 
recommendations, assessment, development, and evaluation) approach was utilized 
to evaluate the certainty of the evidence.
RESULTS: Stevia consumption was associated with significantly reducing blood 
glucose levels (WMD: -3.84; 95 % CI: -7.15, -0.53; P = 0.02, low certainty), 
especially in individuals with higher BMI, diabetes, and hypertension. 
Dose-response analysis revealed a decrease in blood glucose for ≥3342 mg/day of 
stevia consumption. Stevia consumption has been shown to reduce blood glucose 
levels within 1-4 months, as evidenced by dose-response analysis (less than 120 
days) and subgroup analysis (more than four weeks). However, stevia did not 
significantly affect insulin concentration or HbA1C levels (very low and low 
certainty, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Low certainty evidence showed that stevia improved blood glucose 
control, especially when consumed for less than 120 days. However, more 
randomized trials with higher stevia dosages are required.

Copyright © 2024 Research Trust of DiabetesIndia (DiabetesIndia) and National 
Diabetes Obesity and Cholesterol Foundation (N-DOC). Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dsx.2024.103092
PMID: 39098209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


8. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2024 Sep;54(8):485-617. doi: 10.1080/10408444.2024.2362985. 
Epub 2024 Aug 16.

Dietary glycation compounds - implications for human health.

Hellwig M(1), Diel P(2), Eisenbrand G(3), Grune T(4), Guth S(5), Henle T(6), 
Humpf HU(7), Joost HG(8), Marko D(9), Raupbach J(10), Roth A(5), Vieths S(11), 
Mally A(12).

Author information:
(1)Chair of Special Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Sports Medicine, Institute of 
Cardiovascular Research and Sports Medicine, German Sport University Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.
(3)Kühler Grund 48/1, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Molecular Toxicology, German Institute of Human Nutrition 
(DIfE), Nuthetal, Germany.
(5)Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors (IfADo), 
Dortmund, Germany.
(6)Chair of Food Chemistry, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(7)Institute of Food Chemistry, Universität Münster, Münster, Germany.
(8)Department of Experimental Diabetology, German Institute of Human Nutrition 
(DIfE), Nuthetal, Germany.
(9)Department of Food Chemistry and Toxicology, Faculty of Chemistry, University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(10)Institute of Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Braunschweig, 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(11)Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Langen, Germany.
(12)Department of Toxicology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.

The term "glycation compounds" comprises a wide range of structurally diverse 
compounds that are formed endogenously and in food via the Maillard reaction, a 
chemical reaction between reducing sugars and amino acids. Glycation compounds 
produced endogenously are considered to contribute to a range of diseases. This 
has led to the hypothesis that glycation compounds present in food may also 
cause adverse effects and thus pose a nutritional risk to human health. In this 
work, the Senate Commission on Food Safety (SKLM) of the German Research 
Foundation (DFG) summarized data on formation, occurrence, exposure and toxicity 
of glycation compounds (Part A) and systematically assessed potential 
associations between dietary intake of defined glycation compounds and disease, 
including allergy, diabetes, cardiovascular and renal disease, 
gut/gastrotoxicity, brain/cognitive impairment and cancer (Part B). A systematic 
search in Pubmed (Medline), Scopus and Web of Science using a combination of 
keywords defining individual glycation compounds and relevant disease patterns 
linked to the subject area of food, nutrition and diet retrieved 253 original 
publications relevant to the research question. Of these, only 192 were found to 
comply with previously defined quality criteria and were thus considered 
suitable to assess potential health risks of dietary glycation compounds. For 
each adverse health effect considered in this assessment, however, only limited 
numbers of human, animal and in vitro studies were identified. While studies in 
humans were often limited due to small cohort size, short study duration, and 
confounders, experimental studies in animals that allow for controlled exposure 
to individual glycation compounds provided some evidence for impaired glucose 
tolerance, insulin resistance, cardiovascular effects and renal injury in 
response to oral exposure to dicarbonyl compounds, albeit at dose levels by far 
exceeding estimated human exposures. The overall database was generally 
inconsistent or inconclusive. Based on this systematic review, the SKLM 
concludes that there is at present no convincing evidence for a causal 
association between dietary intake of glycation compounds and adverse health 
effects.

Plain Language Summary: Considering the implication of endogenous glycation 
compounds in aging and disease, dietary exposure via consumption of an “AGE 
(advanced glycation end product) rich diet” is increasingly suggested to pose a 
potential health risk. However, studies attempting to assess an association 
between dietary glycation compounds and adverse health effects frequently suffer 
from insufficient chemical analysis of glycation compounds, including inadequate 
structural characterization and limited quantitative data. The Senate Commission 
on Food Safety (SKLM) of the German Research Foundation (DFG) previously defined 
quality criteria for studies designed to assess the effects of dietary glycation 
compounds on human health. The aim of the present work is to summarize data on 
formation, occurrence, exposure and toxicity of glycation compounds (Part A) and 
to systematically evaluate if the currently available scientific database allows 
for a conclusive assessment of potential health effects of defined glycation 
compounds (Part B).The term “glycation compounds” comprises a wide range of 
structurally diverse compounds that derive from the Maillard reaction, a 
chemical reaction between reducing carbohydrates and amino compounds that occurs 
during food processing. In the first stage of the Maillard reaction, reducing 
sugars such as glucose and fructose react for instance with the ε-amino group of 
lysine, which is most abundant in food (“glycation” of lysine). Subsequently, 
these primary reaction products undergo Amadori rearrangement to yield products 
(ARP) such as fructosyllysine (FL) from glucose and also Heyns rearrangement 
products (HRPs) such as glucosyl- and mannosyllysine from fructose. While ARPs 
are rapidly formed during food processing, they are not stable and undergo 
degradation reactions, predominantly to 1,2-dicarbonyl compounds such as glyoxal 
(GO), methylglyoxal (MGO) and 3-deoxyglucosone (3-DG), which are highly 
reactive. The last stage of the Maillard reaction is characterized predominantly 
by the reaction of these dicarbonyl compounds with nucleophilic groups of 
proteins. The side-chains of lysine and arginine residues as well as the 
N-termini of proteins are important reaction sites. Carboxyalkylated amino acids 
such as N-ε-carboxymethyllysine (CML) and N-ε-carboxyethyllysine (CEL) result 
from reaction of the ε-amino group of lysine with the dicarbonyl compounds GO 
and MGO. Dicarbonyl compounds with C5 or C6 chains can form cyclic pyrrole 
derivatives at the ε-amino group of lysine. The most important example for this 
reaction is pyrraline, which is formed from reaction of 3-DG and lysine. The 
reaction of dicarbonyl compounds with the guanidino group of arginine mainly 
leads to hydroimidazolones, of which the MGO-derived hydroimidazolone 1 (MG-H1) 
is best described in food systems.ARPs are the most abundant glycation products 
found in food. Up to 55% of the lysine residues in food may be modified to ARPs 
at the side-chain. Food items particularly rich in ARPs include bread, rusk, 
biscuits, chocolate, and powdered infant formulas. Exposure estimates range 
between 0.6–1.6 mg/kg body weight (bw), although exposure may be as high as 
14.3 mg/kg bw in individuals consuming foods with extreme ARP concentrations. 
Foods particularly rich in dicarbonyl compounds include heat-treated or 
long-term stored items rich in reducing sugars such as jams, alternative 
sweeteners, soft drinks, honey, candies, cookies, and vinegars, especially 
balsamico-type vinegars. The main contributors to the daily intake of MGO, GO, 
and 3-DG are coffee and bread. Dietary exposure to dicarbonyl compounds has been 
estimated to range between 0.02–0.29 mg/kg bw/d for MGO, 0.04–0.16 mg/kg bw/d 
for GO, 0.14–2.3 mg/kg bw/d for 3-DG, and 0.08–0.13 mg/kg bw/d for 
3-deoxygalactosone (3-DGal). Dietary intake of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), 
which can be formed from 3-DG, is estimated to range between 0.0001–0.9 mg/kg 
bw/d. Exposure estimates for individual glycated amino acids range from 
0.03–0.35 mg/kg bw/d for CML, 0.02–0.04 mg/kg bw/d for CEL and 0.19–0.41 mg/kg 
bw/d for MG-H1. From a model diet consisting of 1 L milk, 500 g bakery products 
and 400 mL coffee, an intake of pyrraline corresponding to 0.36 mg/kg bw/d for a 
70 kg person was estimated.Quantitative analysis of individual glycation 
compounds or their metabolites in tissues or body fluids as well as their 
reaction products with amino acids, proteins or DNA may serve to monitor 
exposure to glycation compounds. However, since glycation compounds are also 
formed endogenously, these biomarkers reflect the totality of the exposure, 
making it inherently difficult to define the body burden due to dietary intake 
against the background of endogenous formation.Information on the toxicokinetics 
and toxicity of glycation compounds is scarce and mostly limited to the reactive 
dicarbonyl compounds GO, MGO, 3-DG, HMF, and individual glycated amino acids 
such as CML and CEL. Acute toxicity of dicarbonyl compounds is low to moderate. 
There are some data to suggest that rapid detoxification of dicarbonyls in the 
gastrointestinal tract and liver may limit their oral bioavailability. 
Biotransformation of GO and MGO occurs predominantly via the glutathione 
(GSH)-dependent glyoxalase system, and to a lesser extent via 
glutathione-independent aldo-keto-reductases, which are also responsible for 
biotransformation of 3-DG. GO, MGO and 3-DG readily react with DNA bases 
in vitro, giving rise to DNA adducts. There is clear evidence for genotoxicity 
of GO, MGO and 3-DG. Repeated dose toxicity studies on GO consistently reported 
reduced body weight gain concomitant with reduced food and water consumption but 
did not identify compound related changes in clinical chemistry and hematology 
or histopathological lesions. There is also no evidence for systemic 
carcinogenicity of GO and MGO based on the available studies. However, 
initiation/promotion studies indicate that oral exposure to GO may exhibit 
genotoxic and tumor promoting activity locally in the gastrointestinal tract. 
From a 2-year chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity study in rats, a NOAEL for 
systemic toxicity of GO administered via drinking water of 25 mg/kg bw was 
reported based on reduced body weight and erosions/ulcer in the glandular 
stomach. Other non-neoplastic and neoplastic lesions were not observed. Acute 
toxicity of HMF is also low. From a 90-day repeated dose toxicity study in mice, 
a NOAEL of 94 mg/kg bw was derived based on cytoplasmic alterations of proximal 
tubule epithelial cells of the kidney. HMF was mostly negative in in vitro 
genotoxicity tests, although positive findings for mutagenicity were obtained 
under conditions that promote formation of the chemically reactive sulfuric acid 
ester 5-sulfoxymethylfurfural. There is some evidence of carcinogenic activity 
of HMF in female B6C3F1 mice based on increased incidences of hepatocellular 
adenoma, but not in male mice and rats of both sexes. Although data on oral 
bioavailability of glycated amino acids are mostly limited to CML, it appears 
that glycated amino acids may be absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract after 
oral exposure to their free and protein bound form. Glycated amino acids that 
are not absorbed in the intestine may be subject to metabolism by the gut 
microbiome. Glycated amino acids present in the systemic circulation are rapidly 
eliminated via the urine. Acute oral toxicity of CML is low. Studies in mice and 
rats reported changes in clinical chemistry parameters indicative of impaired 
renal and hepatic function. However, these changes were not dose-related and not 
supported by histopathological evaluation.Previous risk assessments of 
individual glycation compounds did not identify a health concern at estimated 
human exposures (GO, HMF) but also noted the lack of data to draw firm 
conclusions on health risks associated with exposure to MGO.To identify 
potential associations between dietary intake of defined glycation compounds and 
disease a systematic review was carried out according to the Preferred Reporting 
Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) model, applying the 
quality criteria previously defined by the SKLM. Using a combination of keywords 
defining individual glycation compounds and relevant disease patterns linked to 
the subject area of food, nutrition and diet, a systematic search in Pubmed 
(Medline), Scopus and Web of Science was performed. Although the present 
systematic review identified numerous studies that investigated an association 
between an “AGE-rich diet” and adverse health effects, only a subset of studies 
was found to comply with the quality criteria defined by the SKLM and was thus 
considered suitable to assess potential health risks of dietary glycation 
compounds.For each adverse health effect considered in this assessment, only 
limited numbers of human studies were identified. Although studies in humans 
offer the advantage of investigating effects at relevant human exposures, these 
studies did not provide compelling evidence for adverse effects of dietary 
glycation compounds. Animal studies identified in this systematic review provide 
some evidence for induction of impaired glucose tolerance, insulin resistance, 
cardiovascular effects and renal injury in response to oral exposure to GO and 
MGO as representatives of dicarbonyl compounds. Only limited evidence points to 
a link between high intake of glycated amino acids and metabolic disorders. 
However, these effects were typically reported to occur at dose levels that 
exceed human dietary exposure, often by several orders of magnitude. 
Unfortunately, most studies employed only one dose level, precluding 
characterization of dose-response and derivation of a point of departure for 
risk assessment. While in vitro studies provide some evidence for a potential 
mechanistic link between individual glycation compounds and presumed adverse 
health effects, the clinical and toxicological relevance of the in vitro 
findings is often limited by the use of high concentrations of glycation 
compounds that by far exceed human dietary exposure and by insufficient evidence 
for corresponding adverse effects in vivo. A key question that has not been 
adequately considered in most studies investigating systemic effects of 
glycation compounds is the extent of oral bioavailability of dietary glycation 
compounds, including the form in which MRPs may be taken up (e.g. free vs. 
peptide bound glycated amino acids). Understanding how much dietary glycation 
compounds really add to the significant endogenous background is critical to 
appraise the relevance of dietary MRPs for human health.While it appears 
mechanistically plausible that glycation of dietary allergens may affect their 
allergenic potential, the currently available data do not support the hypothesis 
that dietary glycation compounds may increase the risk for diet-induced 
allergies. There are no human studies addressing the immunological effects of 
dietary AGEs. Accordingly, there are no data on whether dietary AGEs promote the 
development of allergies, nor whether existing allergies are enhanced or 
attenuated. In numerous in vitro studies, the IgG/E binding ability of antigens 
and therefore their allergenic potential has been predominantly reported to be 
reduced by glycation. However, some in vitro studies showed that glycated 
proteins bind to receptors of immunological cells, and thus may have promoting 
effects on immune response and inflammation.Although experimental data from 
animal studies provide some evidence that high doses of individual glycation 
compounds such as MGO and protein-bound CML may produce certain adverse health 
effects, including diabetogenic, cardiovascular, metabolic and renal effects, 
the doses required to achieve these effects by far exceed human dietary 
exposures. Of note, in the only long-term study identified, a high dose of MGO 
administered via drinking water to mice for 18 months had no adverse effects on 
the kidneys, cardiovascular system, or development of diabetes.Experimental data 
from animal studies provide evidence that high doses of defined glycation 
compounds such as MGO or protein-bound CML may affect glucose homeostasis. 
However, the doses required to produce these effects markedly exceed human 
dietary exposure. Results from human studies are inconclusive: Three short-term 
intervention studies suggested that diets rich in AGEs may impair glucose 
homeostasis, whereas one recent intervention study and two observational studies 
failed to show such an effect.For the cardiovascular system, there is some 
evidence from in vitro and in vivo studies that high concentrations of MRPs, 
well above the dietary exposure of humans, may enhance inflammation in the 
cardiovascular system, induce endothelial damage, increase blood pressure and 
increase the risk of thrombosis. Only a limited number of human intervention 
studies investigated potential effects of short-term exposure and longer-term 
effects of glycation compounds on the cardiovascular system, and yielded 
inconsistent results. The few observational studies available either found no 
association between dietary MRP intake and cardiovascular function or even 
reported beneficial effects. Therefore, currently no definitive conclusion on 
potential acute and chronic effects of dietary MRPs on inflammation and 
cardiovascular function can be drawn. However, there is currently also no 
convincing evidence that potential adverse effects on the cardiovascular system 
are triggered by dietary MRP intake.Furthermore, human studies did not provide 
evidence for an adverse effect of dietary MRPs on kidney function. In animal 
studies with high levels of oral intake, MGO was reported to cause structural 
and functional effects in the kidney. Several studies show that the 
concentration of modified proteins and amino acids, such as CML, increases 
significantly in kidney tissue after oral intake. One study showed a negative 
effect of a high-temperature-treated diet containing increased CML 
concentrations on kidney structure integrity and impaired glomerular filtration. 
The causative relationship of accumulation of dietary MRPs and a functional 
decline of the kidneys, however, needs further confirmation.With regard to gut 
health, there is some evidence for alterations in gut microflora composition and 
the production of individual short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) upon dietary 
exposure to glycation compounds. However, this has not been linked to adverse 
health effects in humans and may rather reflect adaptation of the gut microbiota 
to changing nutrients. In particular, a human observational study and several 
animal studies did not find a correlation between the intake of glycation 
compounds and increased intestinal inflammation. In animal studies, positive 
effects of glycation compounds on gut tissue damage and dysbiosis during colitis 
were described.Considering clear evidence for DNA reactivity and genotoxicity of 
the dicarbonyl compounds GO, MGO and 3-DG, it is plausible to suspect that 
dicarbonyl compounds may induce mutations and cancer. Although there is some 
evidence for tumor promoting activity of GO locally in the gastrointestinal 
tract, the only guideline-compatible chronic rodent bioassays reported erosions 
and ulcer in the glandular stomach but no treatment-related neoplastic lesions. 
A recent multinational cohort study with focus on CEL, CML, and MG-H1 found no 
evidence to support the hypothesis that dietary AGEs are linked to cancer 
risk.Evidence for an association between human exposure to dietary glycation 
compounds and detrimental effects on the brain and on cognitive performance is 
far from being compelling. No human studies fully complying with the defined 
quality criteria were identified. A few experimental studies reported 
neuroinflammation and cognitive impairment following dietary MRP exposure, but 
these can be considered indicative at best and do not support firm conclusions 
for human health. In addition to utilizing exceedingly high dosages of 
individual agents like CML, harsh processing conditions causing a multitude of 
major process-related changes do not allow to convincingly reconcile effects 
observed with measured/supposed contents of free and protein-bound CML 
alone.Overall, although dietary glycation compounds have been claimed to 
contribute to a wide range of adverse health effects, the present critical 
evaluation of the literature allows the conclusion that the available data are 
insufficient, inadequate or inconclusive and do not compellingly support the 
hypothesis of human health risks being related to the presence of glycation 
compounds in food. The study limitations detailed above, together with the fact 
that a large number of studies did not comply with the defined quality criteria 
and therefore had to be excluded highlight the importance of performing 
adequately designed human or animal studies to inform scientifically reliable 
health risk assessment.To achieve this, high quality, dependable scientific 
cooperation within various disciplines is pivotal.

DOI: 10.1080/10408444.2024.2362985
PMID: 39150724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]