SOURCE: PUBMED
TOPIC: Ayurveda herbal medicine evidence based
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

1. Asian Pac J Trop Biomed. 2013 May;3(5):337-52. doi: 
10.1016/S2221-1691(13)60075-1.

A review on therapeutic potential of Nigella sativa: A miracle herb.

Ahmad A(1), Husain A, Mujeeb M, Khan SA, Najmi AK, Siddique NA, Damanhouri ZA, 
Anwar F.

Author information:
(1)Health Information Technology Department, Jeddah Community College, King 
Abdulaziz University, Jeddah-21589, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Nigella sativa (N. sativa) (Family Ranunculaceae) is a widely used medicinal 
plant throughout the world. It is very popular in various traditional systems of 
medicine like Unani and Tibb, Ayurveda and Siddha. Seeds and oil have a long 
history of folklore usage in various systems of medicines and food. The seeds of 
N. sativa have been widely used in the treatment of different diseases and 
ailments. In Islamic literature, it is considered as one of the greatest forms 
of healing medicine. It has been recommended for using on regular basis in 
Tibb-e-Nabwi (Prophetic Medicine). It has been widely used as antihypertensive, 
liver tonics, diuretics, digestive, anti-diarrheal, appetite stimulant, 
analgesics, anti-bacterial and in skin disorders. Extensive studies on N. sativa 
have been carried out by various researchers and a wide spectrum of its 
pharmacological actions have been explored which may include antidiabetic, 
anticancer, immunomodulator, analgesic, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, 
spasmolytic, bronchodilator, hepato-protective, renal protective, 
gastro-protective, antioxidant properties, etc. Due to its miraculous power of 
healing, N. sativa has got the place among the top ranked evidence based herbal 
medicines. This is also revealed that most of the therapeutic properties of this 
plant are due to the presence of thymoquinone which is major bioactive component 
of the essential oil. The present review is an effort to provide a detailed 
survey of the literature on scientific researches of pharmacognostical 
characteristics, chemical composition and pharmacological activities of the 
seeds of this plant.

DOI: 10.1016/S2221-1691(13)60075-1
PMCID: PMC3642442
PMID: 23646296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: We declare that 
we have no conflict of interest.


2. CA Cancer J Clin. 2022 Mar;72(2):144-164. doi: 10.3322/caac.21706. Epub 2021
Nov  9.

Integrative oncology: Addressing the global challenges of cancer prevention and 
treatment.

Mao JJ(1), Pillai GG(2), Andrade CJ(3), Ligibel JA(4)(5), Basu P(6), Cohen L(7), 
Khan IA(8), Mustian KM(9), Puthiyedath R(10), Dhiman KS(11), Lao L(12), Ghelman 
R(13), Cáceres Guido P(14)(15), Lopez G(7), Gallego-Perez DF(15)(16), Salicrup 
LA(17).

Author information:
(1)Bendheim Integrative Medicine Center, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, New York.
(2)Traditional, Complementary and Integrative Medicine Unit, Service Delivery 
and Safety Department, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Brazilian National Cancer Institute, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Leonard P. Zakim Center for Integrative Therapies and Healthy Living, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)International Agency for Research on Cancer, World Health Organization, Lyon, 
France.
(7)Integrative Medicine Program, Department of Palliative, Rehabilitation and 
Integrative Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas.
(8)National Center for Natural Products Research, University of Mississippi, 
Jackson, Mississippi.
(9)Wilmot Cancer Institute, Department of Surgery, University of Rochester 
Medical Center, Rochester, New York.
(10)Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University, Amritapuri, Kerala, India.
(11)Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(12)Virginia University of Integrative Medicine, Fairfax, Virginia.
(13)Brazilian Academic Consortium for Integrative Health, University of São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(14)Pharmacokinetics and Research in Clinical Pharmacology and Integrative 
Medicine Group, Garrahan Pediatric Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(15)Traditional, Complementary, and Integrative Medicine Network of the 
Americas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(16)Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts.
(17)Center for Global Health and Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative 
Medicine, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland.

The increase in cancer incidence and mortality is challenging current cancer 
care delivery globally, disproportionally affecting low- and middle-income 
countries (LMICs) when it comes to receiving evidence-based cancer prevention, 
treatment, and palliative and survivorship care. Patients in LMICs often rely on 
traditional, complementary, and integrative medicine (TCIM) that is more 
familiar, less costly, and widely available. However, spheres of influence and 
tensions between conventional medicine and TCIM can further disrupt efforts in 
evidence-based cancer care. Integrative oncology provides a framework to 
research and integrate safe, effective TCIM alongside conventional cancer 
treatment and can help bridge health care gaps in delivering evidence-informed, 
patient-centered care. This growing field uses lifestyle modifications, mind and 
body therapies (eg, acupuncture, massage, meditation, and yoga), and natural 
products to improve symptom management and quality of life among patients with 
cancer. On the basis of this review of the global challenges of cancer control 
and the current status of integrative oncology, the authors recommend: 1) 
educating and integrating TCIM providers into the cancer control workforce to 
promote risk reduction and culturally salient healthy life styles; 2) developing 
and testing TCIM interventions to address cancer symptoms or treatment-related 
adverse effects (eg, pain, insomnia, fatigue); and 3) disseminating and 
implementing evidence-based TCIM interventions as part of comprehensive 
palliative and survivorship care so patients from all cultures can live with or 
beyond cancer with respect, dignity, and vitality. With conventional medicine 
and TCIM united under a cohesive framework, integrative oncology may provide 
citizens of the world with access to safe, effective, evidence-informed, and 
culturally sensitive cancer care.

© 2021 The Authors. CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.3322/caac.21706
PMID: 34751943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Hepatol Commun. 2023 Sep 27;7(10):e0270. doi: 10.1097/HC9.0000000000000270. 
eCollection 2023 Oct 1.

Ashwagandha-induced liver injury-A case series from India and literature review.

Philips CA(1)(2), Valsan A(3), Theruvath AH(2), Ravindran R(2), Oommen TT(1)(4), 
Rajesh S(5), Bishnu S(6), Augustine P(1)(4); Liver Research Club India.

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Translational Hepatology, The Liver Institute, Center for 
Excellence in Gastrointestinal Sciences, Rajagiri Hospital, Aluva, Kerala, 
India.
(2)Department of Hepatology, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Kochi, 
Kerala, India.
(3)Department of Clinical Research, Division of Complementary and Alternative 
Medicine, The Liver Institute, Center for Excellence in Gastrointestinal 
Sciences, Rajagiri Hospital, Aluva, Kerala, India.
(4)Gastroenterology & Advanced GI Endoscopy, Center of Excellence in GI 
Sciences, Rajagiri Hospital, Aluva, Kerala, India.
(5)Interventional Hepatobiliary Radiology, Center of Excellence in GI Sciences, 
Rajagiri Hospital, Aluva, Kerala, India.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Astha Medical Centre, 
Koshbagan, Burdwan, West Bengal, India.

BACKGROUND: Ashwagandha herb is commonly used in Ayurveda and a "fad" dietary 
supplement for a host of indications based on low levels of evidence. Recently, 
ashwagandha was implicated in multiple reports of herb-induced liver injury 
(HILI), mainly from the United States. We present the first, and currently 
largest, series of ashwagandha-HILI from multiple centers in India.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the respective institutional electronic 
medical records for ashwagandha-HILI. Patients consuming ashwagandha as part of 
multiherbal formulations or along with other known hepatotoxic supplements or 
medicines were excluded. All patients underwent a detailed diagnostic workup to 
exclude competing causes reasonably. Where possible, the implicated herbal 
formulation was retrieved and subjected to chemical analysis.
RESULTS: Out of 23 patients with liver injury from ashwagandha (January 2019 to 
December 2022), we report 8 patients with single-ingredient formulation-related 
HILI. Study cohort was male predominant, and cholestatic hepatitis was the 
commonest presentation. Five patients had underlying chronic liver disease; 3 
presented with acute-on-chronic liver failure, and all 3 died on follow-up. In 
others, the liver injury was prolonged, nonetheless self-limiting. Liver biopsy 
revealed cholestatic features predominantly with hepatocellular necrosis and 
lymphocyte/eosinophil predominant portal-based inflammation. One patient 
progressed to chronic HILI. Chemical analysis revealed only natural 
phytochemicals without adulteration or contamination.
CONCLUSIONS: Ashwagandha-HILI presents with cholestatic hepatitis and can lead 
to the syndrome of acute-on-chronic liver failure with high mortality in those 
with pre-existing liver disease. Educating the public on avoiding the use of 
potentially toxic and unrecommended herbal supplements can help mitigate the 
avoidable liver disease burden in the community.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1097/HC9.0000000000000270
PMCID: PMC10531359
PMID: 37756041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts to report.


4. J Pain Res. 2024 Feb 8;17:599-608. doi: 10.2147/JPR.S432090. eCollection 2024.

Evidence-Based Opinions from Multidisciplinary Experts on Use of Naturopathic 
Herbal Remedies in Pain Management.

Mobasheri A(1)(2)(3)(4), Spring-Charles A(5), Gamaleri FC(6), McSwan J(7), Garg 
M(8), Sethi VS(9).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit of Health Sciences and Technology, Physics and Technology, 
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(2)Department of Regenerative Medicine, State Research Institute Centre for 
Innovative Medicine, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(3)Department of Joint Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People's 
Republic of China.
(4)World Health Organization Collaborating Center for Public Health Aspects of 
Musculoskeletal Health and Aging, Université de Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(5)Hope Spring Clinic, London, UK.
(6)Pharmacy San Rocco, Cornaredo (Milan), Italy.
(7)PainWISE Pty Ltd, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
(8)Nutraceuticals Research Program, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, 
Newcastle, NSW, Australia.
(9)Medical Affairs, Haleon (Formerly GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare) Pte. 
Ltd., Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacological approaches to acute and chronic pain management, 
including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and opioids, are 
respectively associated with adverse reactions (such as gastrointestinal, 
cardiovascular, and renal effects) that might limit their use in patients with 
comorbidities and controversy related to inappropriate use. Naturopathic 
remedies might offer patients alternative and integrative treatments with 
minimal side effects.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the regional variation in the acceptance and use of 
naturopathic remedies in pain management.
METHODS: Two expert panel discussions were held by GlaxoSmithKline Consumer 
Healthcare (now Haleon Pte. Ltd.) over 9 and 12 hours in 2020 and 2021, 
respectively, and attended by multidisciplinary experts in naturopathy, 
Ayurvedic medicine, community pharmacy, physiotherapy, clinical pharmacy, 
Western medicine, academics, and naturopathic pain relief. Experts shared and 
discussed their experiences of naturopathic treatments and relevant clinical 
evidence related to different types of pain (including joint and muscle pain, 
migraine, sleeplessness due to pain, and general pain) and examined barriers to 
providing support to patients.
RESULTS: Experts agreed on the potential for curcumin (2020, 71.4% [5/7]; 2021, 
91.7% [11/12]) and fish oil (2020, 100% [7/7]) for management of osteoarthritic 
joint pain although these are not uniformly recommended in osteoarthritis 
treatment guidelines. In treatment of migraines, coenzyme Q10 and magnesium were 
favored by experts (2021, 90.9% [10/11] and 63.6% [7/11], respectively).
CONCLUSION: The need was emphasized for more and higher quality clinical studies 
to support naturopathic remedies, which might not be reflected in the latest 
treatment guidelines. The expert panel also highlighted missed opportunities for 
physicians and pharmacists to recommend effective naturopathic treatments.

© 2024 Mobasheri et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JPR.S432090
PMCID: PMC10860847
PMID: 38347854

Conflict of interest statement: VS is a current employee of Haleon (formerly GSK 
Consumer Healthcare); AM has consulted for and received honoraria from Haleon. 
AS-C, FCG, JM, and MG have all received honoraria from Haleon. The authors 
report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


5. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1191:415-449. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9705-0_22.

Current Research on Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) in the 
Treatment of Anxiety Disorders: An Evidence-Based Review.

Trkulja V(1), Barić H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Zagreb University School of Medicine, Zagreb, 
Croatia. vtrkulja@mef.hr.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, 
Croatia.

Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) encompasses a wide range of 
different nonmainstream therapies that have been increasingly used for treatment 
or adjunctive treatment of various ailments with anxiety/anxiety disorders being 
one of the commonly CAM (self)-medicated conditions. Thousands of published 
papers refer to use of CAM in various psychiatric disorders or in healthy or 
medically ill patients with mood or anxiety difficulties. In this chapter we 
focus specifically on clinically diagnosed (in line with the standard criteria) 
anxiety disorders and overview evidence of efficacy/safety of a range of CAM 
modalities: biologically based therapies (typically herbal preparations and less 
so nutraceuticals); manipulative and body-based therapies (acupuncture, aerobic 
exercise, massage, therapeutic touch, repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation, balneotherapy, and others); mind-body therapies (yoga, Morita 
therapy, Tai Chi, reiki, Chinese cognitive therapy, religious and spiritual 
interventions, relaxation, mediation, and mindfulness-based interventions); and 
alternative medical systems (Ayurveda, homeopathy). We focus exclusively on 
randomized controlled trials and attempt to evaluate the existing body of 
evidence in the same manner that is applied to mainstream treatments.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-32-9705-0_22
PMID: 32002940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Health Serv Res Policy. 2009 Oct;14(4):219-23. doi:
10.1258/jhsrp.2009.009009.

Evidence-based practice in British complementary and alternative medicine: 
double standards?

Hunt K(1), Ernst E.

Author information:
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Universities of Exeter & Plymouth, Exeter, UK. 
Katherine.hunt@pms.ac.uk

Comment in
    J Health Serv Res Policy. 2009 Oct;14(4):224-5. doi: 
10.1258/jhsrp.2009.009106.

OBJECTIVES: The principles of evidence-based practice (EBP) are fundamental to 
medical ethics and seem essential for any form of health care. In 2000, a House 
of Lords Select Committee recommended that the ethos of EBP should extend to 
complementary and alternative medicine. The aim of this investigation was to 
determine whether EBP is incorporated in the codes of ethics of British 
complementary and alternative medicine organizations.
METHODS: We obtained the codes of the following bodies: Association of 
Naturopathic Practitioners, Association of Traditional Chinese Medicine (UK), 
Ayurvedic Practitioners Association, British Acupuncture Council, Complementary 
and Natural Healthcare Council, European Herbal Practitioners Association, 
General Chiropractic Council, General Osteopathic Council, General Regulatory 
Council for Complementary Therapies, National Institute of Medical Herbalists, 
Register of Chinese Herbal Medicine, Society of Homeopaths, UK Healers, Unified 
Register of Herbal Practitioners. We then extracted the statements referring to 
EBP and compared this with what the respective codes of British doctors and 
nurses proscribed.
RESULTS: Only the General Chiropractic Council, the General Osteopathic Council 
and the General Regulatory Council for Complementary Therapies oblige their 
members to adopt EBP.
CONCLUSIONS: This discloses double standards in UK health care which may 
compromise patient safety.

DOI: 10.1258/jhsrp.2009.009009
PMID: 19770119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2024 Oct 1;24(5):397-403. doi: 
10.1097/ACI.0000000000001024. Epub 2024 Aug 13.

Integrative therapeutics for ocular surface disorders.

Kourosh A(1), Nanda A(2)(3), Sheth DK(4)(5), Parmer FE(6).

Author information:
(1)Arkansas College of Osteopathic Medicine Clinical Faculty, Fort Smith, 
Arkansas.
(2)Asthma and Allergy Center, Lewisville and Flower Mound, Denton County.
(3)Division of Allergy and Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas.
(4)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Washington DC Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, George Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia.
(5)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland.
(6)Eye Consultants of Texas Ocular Surface Center of Excellence, University of 
Texas at Arlington Advisory Board, Arlington, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Integrative medicine techniques are increasingly accepted 
into the treatment paradigm for many chronic disorders including eye disease. 
Over 71% of patients, including 67% of those with eye disorders, use some form 
of Integrative therapy. Physicians should be well versed in evidence-based 
therapies to know how to refer patients for the best complimentary care. We 
highlight the most effective integrative therapeutics from different 
complementary treatment paradigms to offer a framework for approaching therapy 
in patients with ocular surface disorders (OSDs).
RECENT FINDINGS: Lifestyle and behavioral modifications help a proportion of 
people with OSDs like dry eye disease and allergic conjunctivitis, which are 
interrelated disorders. Nutrition and supplementation can also play a role in 
addressing underlying inflammation and improving OSD symptoms. Acupuncture and 
traditional herbal medicine may also benefit some patients. New technologies 
offer innovative treatment pathways in the treatment of OSD but require referral 
to Ocular Surface Treatment Centers.
SUMMARY: Integrative treatment approach for OSD incorporates allopathic 
medicine, traditional remedies and lifestyle behavioral interventions, Ayurveda 
and herbal medicine, Nutritional Supplements, Homeopathy, Acupuncture and 
Chinese Medicine. New cutting-edge technologies offer breakthroughs in difficult 
to treat ocular surface cases. Collaboration between allergy or otolaryngology 
offices, complementary practitioners, as well as optometrists and 
ophthalmologists in Ocular Surface Treatment Centers can offer patients new 
avenues of treatment.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/ACI.0000000000001024
PMID: 39137038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Z Rheumatol. 2024 Sep;83(7):549-561. doi: 10.1007/s00393-024-01524-9. Epub
2024  Jun 27.

[Procedures of complementary medicine in rheumatology].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Keyßer G(1), Frohne I, Schultz O, Reuß-Borst M, Sander O, Pfeil A.

Author information:
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin II, Universitätsklinikum Halle 
(Saale), Ernst-Grube-Str. 40, 06120, Halle (Saale), Deutschland. 
Gernot.Keyszer@uk-halle.de.

Patients with diseases of the musculoskeletal system are confronted with a large 
quantity of treatment offers based on methods of complementary medicine. Despite 
a considerable number of publications on this topic, the scientific evidence is 
still poor. This article focuses on Ayurvedic medicine (AM), traditional Chinese 
medicine (TCM), mind-body medicine and homeopathy. These procedures have 
a longstanding tradition of practice and each claims to have its own theoretical 
concept; however, the application in the field of rheumatology can only be 
recommended either for specific entities or, in the case of homeopathy, not at 
all. In addition, this article summarizes the evidence for dietary 
recommendations, nutritional supplements and herbal medicine in rheumatology. 
The latter topics are frequently discussed in the popular press and are 
a much-debated issue between physicians and patients; however, clear-cut 
recommendations for the application on a scientific basis are the exception and 
mainly consist of the endorsement to adhere to the principles of a Mediterranean 
diet.

Publisher: Für Patienten mit Erkrankungen des muskuloskeletalen Systems 
existiert eine schwer überschaubare Zahl von Behandlungsangeboten aus dem 
Bereich komplementärer Heilverfahren. Trotz einer beträchtlichen Zahl von 
Publikationen zu diesem Thema ist die wissenschaftliche Evidenz nach wie vor 
gering. Der Beitrag widmet sich der ayurvedischen Medizin (AM), der 
traditionellen chinesischen Medizin (TCM), der Mind-Body-Medizin und der 
Homöopathie. Auch wenn es sich dabei um Verfahren handelt, die eine lange 
Anwendungstradition haben und sich auf ein eigenes theoretisches Konzept 
berufen, kann ihre Anwendung in der Rheumatologie nur für bestimmte Entitäten 
oder – im Fall der Homöopathie – nicht empfohlen werden. Zusätzlich wird die 
Evidenz für Diätverfahren, Nahrungsergänzungsmittel und Phytotherapie 
vorgestellt. Die Letztgenannten treffen in der Laienpresse auf großes Interesse 
und beanspruchen in der Sprechstunde einen relevanten Anteil an Beratungszeit. 
Allerdings sind auch hier Anwendungsempfehlungen auf wissenschaftlicher 
Grundlage die Ausnahme und fokussieren v. a. auf eine vollwertige, an den 
Prinzipien der Mittelmeerkost orientierte Ernährung.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Medizin Verlag GmbH, 
ein Teil von Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00393-024-01524-9
PMID: 38935116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]