SOURCE: PUBMED
TOPIC: iron deficiency anemia India women
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

1. Nutrients. 2022 Jul 20;14(14):2976. doi: 10.3390/nu14142976.

Iron Deficiency Anemia: Efficacy and Limitations of Nutritional and 
Comprehensive Mitigation Strategies.

Kumar SB(1), Arnipalli SR(1), Mehta P(1), Carrau S(1), Ziouzenkova O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA.

Iron deficiency anemia (IDA) has reached epidemic proportions in developing 
countries and has become a major global public health problem, affecting mainly 
0-5-year-old children and young women of childbearing age, especially during 
pregnancy. Iron deficiency can lead to life-threatening loss of red blood cells, 
muscle function, and energy production. Therefore, the pathogenic features 
associated with IDA are weakness and impaired growth, motor, and cognitive 
performance. IDA affects the well-being of the young generation and the economic 
advancement of developing countries, such as India. The imbalance between iron 
intake/absorption/storage and iron utilization/loss culminates into IDA. 
However, numerous strategic programs aimed to increase iron intake have shown 
that improvement of iron intake alone has not been sufficient to mitigate IDA. 
Emerging critical risk factors for IDA include a composition of cultural diets, 
infections, genetics, inflammatory conditions, metabolic diseases, dysbiosis, 
and socioeconomic parameters. In this review, we discuss numerous IDA mitigation 
programs in India and their limitations. The new multifactorial mechanism of IDA 
pathogenesis opens perspectives for the improvement of mitigation programs and 
relief of IDA in India and worldwide.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14142976
PMCID: PMC9315959
PMID: 35889932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


2. Nutrients. 2023 Jul 13;15(14):3125. doi: 10.3390/nu15143125.

Prevention and Management of Iron Deficiency/Iron-Deficiency Anemia in Women: An 
Asian Expert Consensus.

Pai RD(1), Chong YS(2), Clemente-Chua LR(3), Irwinda R(4), Huynh TNK(5), Wibowo 
N(4), Gamilla MCZ(6), Mahdy ZA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Lilavati Hospital, Mumbai 400050, 
India.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117597, Singapore.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Medical City, Pasig 1605, 
Philippines.
(4)Fetomaternal Division, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Indonesia-Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital, Jakarta 10430, 
Indonesia.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Pham Ngoc Thach University of 
Medicine, Ho Chi Minh 700000, Vietnam.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Santo Tomas Hospital, 
Manila 1008, Philippines.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti 
Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur 56000, Malaysia.

The lack of standardized clinical practice impeding the optimal management of 
iron deficiency (ID) and iron deficiency anemia (IDA) in women is a global 
concern, particularly in the Asia-Pacific region. The aim of this study was to 
determine best practices through a Delphi consensus process. In Round 1, 
panelists were asked to rate their level of agreement with 99 statements across 
four domains: identification, diagnosis and assessment, prevention, and 
treatment of ID/IDA in women. In Round 2, panelists reappraised their ratings in 
view of the collective feedback and responses to Round 1. After two rounds, 
consensus (≥85% agreement) was reached for 84% of the Delphi statements. Experts 
agreed on the role of presenting symptoms and risk factors in prompting 
assessments of anemia and iron status in women. Experts repeatedly called for 
prevention, recommending preventive iron supplementation for pregnant women 
irrespective of anemia prevalence levels, and for non-pregnant adult women, 
adolescent girls, and perimenopausal women living in areas with a high 
prevalence of anemia. Experts unanimously agreed to prescribing oral ferrous 
iron as first-line therapy for uncomplicated ID/IDA. The recommendations and 
clinical pathway algorithms generated should be used to inform clinical practice 
and standardize the care of women at risk or presenting with ID/IDA in the 
Asia-Pacific region.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15143125
PMCID: PMC10383547
PMID: 37513543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The expert panel consensus meeting was organized 
in association with Procter & Gamble Health. We acknowledge Jass Liew and Vinod 
Malve, employees of Procter & Gamble Health, for organizing the logistics of the 
consensus meeting.


3. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2025 Aug;233(2):120.e1-120.e18. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajog.2025.01.037. Epub 2025 Feb 3.

Single-dose intravenous iron vs oral iron for treatment of maternal iron 
deficiency anemia: a randomized clinical trial.

Derman RJ(1), Bellad MB(2), Somannavar MS(3), Bhandari S(4), Mehta S(4), Mehta 
S(5), Sharma DK(6), Yogeshkumar S(7), Charantimath U(7), Patil AP(8), Mallapur 
AA(9), Ramadurg U(10), Sangavi R(11), Patil PS(12), Roy S(13), Vastrad P(14), 
Shekhar C(1), Leiby BE(15), Hartman RL(15), Georgieff M(16), Mennemeyer S(17), 
Aghai Z(18), Thind S(1), Boelig RC(19); RAPIDIRON Trial Group (Appendix).

Author information:
(1)Department of Global Affairs, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, KLE Academy of Higher Education and 
Research's J N Medical College, Belagavi, Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, KLE Academy of Higher Education and Research's J 
N Medical College, Belagavi, Karnataka, India.
(4)Department of Medicine, Sawai Man Singh Medical College (SMSMC), Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sawai Man Singh Medical College 
(SMSMC), Jaipur, Rajasthan, India.
(6)Department of Preventative and Social Medicine, Sawai Man Singh Medical 
College (SMSMC), Jaipur, Rajasthan, India.
(7)Department of Community Medicine, KLE Academy of Higher Education and 
Research's J N Medical College, Belagavi, Karnataka, India.
(8)Women's and Children's Health Research Unit, KLE Academy of Higher Education 
and Research's J N Medical College, Belagavi, Karnataka, India.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, S Nijalingappa Medical and HSK 
Hospital and Research Centre, Bagalkote, Karnataka, India.
(10)Department of Community Medicine, S Nijalingappa Medical and HSK Hospital 
and Research Centre, Bagalkote, Karnataka, India.
(11)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Raichur Institute of Medical 
Sciences (RIMS), Raichur, Karnataka, India.
(12)Department of Physiology, Raichur Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS), 
Raichur, Karnataka, India.
(13)Model Rural Health Research Unit (MRHRU), Sirwar, Karnataka, India; ICMR - 
National Institute of Traditional Medicine (ICMR/NITM), Belagavi, Karnataka, 
India.
(14)Model Rural Health Research Unit (MRHRU), Sirwar, Karnataka, India.
(15)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology, and Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(17)Department of Health Care Organization and Policy, School of Public Health, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
(18)Department of Neonatology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA.
(19)Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA. Electronic address: 
Rupsa.Boelig@jefferson.edu.

BACKGROUND: Maternal iron deficiency anemia is a persistent global health 
challenge with increased risk of adverse perinatal outcomes. Obstetric 
guidelines advocate for first-line treatment of moderate iron deficiency anemia 
with twice-daily oral iron; however, rates of iron deficiency anemia in 
pregnancy remain above global targets and are rising.
OBJECTIVE: Determine whether single-dose intravenous iron for primary treatment 
of maternal iron deficiency anemia in the second trimester is superior to twice 
daily oral iron in reducing incidence of low birth weight infants and maternal 
anemia at delivery.
STUDY DESIGN: This is a parallel, 3-arm, semiblind superiority randomized 
controlled multicenter trial across 4 sites in India from March 15, 2021-May 12, 
2023. Participants were singleton pregnancies at 14 to 17 weeks with moderate 
iron deficiency anemia (hemoglobin 7.0-9.9 g/dL) who were randomized 1:1:1 to 
(1) 60 mg oral ferrous sulfate twice daily; or single-dose infusion of (2) 
intravenous ferric derisomaltose or (3) intravenous ferric carboxymaltose. Two 
intravenous arms were selected as these are the only 2 intravenous iron 
formulations publicly available in India. All participants received folic acid 
supplementation throughout pregnancy and antihelminthic therapy, as recommended 
by national guidelines. The dual primary outcomes were: (1) low birth weight 
(<2500 grams) and (2) attainment of a maternal nonanemic state (hemoglobin ≥11.0 
g/dL at 30-34 weeks or delivery) for each intravenous iron arm vs oral iron; 
intravenous iron arms were not compared to each other. Secondary outcomes 
included safety measures, and other maternal and infant outcomes. Participants 
with hemoglobin <7 g/dL or <1 g/dL improvement on therapy received rescue 
treatment with intravenous iron or blood transfusion as determined by their 
provider. Sensitivity analyses included defining nonanemic state as achieving 
hemoglobin ≥11.0 without need for additional IV iron or transfusion. Comparison 
of each intravenous iron arm to oral iron was conducted with a 2-sided alpha set 
at 0.0005 for achieving nonanemic state and 0.0245 for low birth weight for each 
intravenous iron arm using a Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel chi-square test stratified 
by enrollment site.
RESULTS: The oral iron, ferric derisomaltose, and ferric carboxymaltose arms 
included 1450, 1456, and 1462 participants respectively. There was a reduced 
rate of low birth weight with intravenous ferric carboxymaltose (25·2%, relative 
risk 0·87 [97·55% confidence interval 0.75, 0.99], P=.017), but not intravenous 
ferric derisomaltose (29.1%, relative risk 0.98 [97.55% confidence interval 
0.86, 1.12], P=.71) vs oral iron (29.3%). Achievement of nonanemic state was not 
improved: intravenous ferric carboxymaltose (relative risk 1.05 [99.95% 
confidence interval 0.97-1.15]) and intravenous ferric derisomaltose (relative 
risk 1.06 [99.95% confidence interval 0.98, 1.16]) vs oral (69.7%). In 
sensitivity analysis, there was increased rate of achieving nonanemic state 
without use of additional IV iron or transfusion in both intravenous ferric 
derisomaltose (relative risk 1.25 (1.13-1.396), P<.0001) and intravenous ferric 
carboxymaltose (relative risk 1.24 (1.12-1.38), P<.0001) vs oral iron.
CONCLUSION: First-line treatment of moderate maternal iron deficiency anemia 
with single-dose infusion of intravenous iron results in a reduced incidence of 
low birth weight infants (intravenous ferric carboxymaltose vs oral) and a 
higher incidence of attaining maternal nonanemic state without use of additional 
iron or blood transfusion (intravenous ferric carboxymaltose and ferric 
derisomaltose vs oral). Clinical guidelines should address the potential benefit 
of single-dose intravenous iron as the primary treatment of moderate iron 
deficiency anemia in pregnancy.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2025.01.037
PMID: 39909327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2020 Jan;74(1):112-125. doi: 10.1038/s41430-019-0464-3. Epub 
2019 Jul 11.

Anaemia and iron deficiency in pregnancy and adverse perinatal outcomes in 
Southern India.

Finkelstein JL(1)(2), Kurpad AV(3)(4), Bose B(3), Thomas T(3), Srinivasan K(4), 
Duggan C(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. 
jfinkelstein@cornell.edu.
(2)St. John's Research Institute, Bangalore, India. jfinkelstein@cornell.edu.
(3)St. John's Research Institute, Bangalore, India.
(4)St. John's Medical College, Bangalore, India.
(5)St. John's Research Institute, Bangalore, India. 
Christopher.duggan@childrens.harvard.edu.
(6)Department of Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and Center 
for Nutrition, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 
Christopher.duggan@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: We examined the prevalence of anaemia, iron deficiency, 
and inflammation during pregnancy and their associations with adverse pregnancy 
and infant outcomes in India.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: Three hundred and sixty-six women participating in a 
randomised trial of vitamin B12 supplementation were monitored to assess 
haemoglobin (Hb), serum ferritin (SF), hepcidin, C-reactive protein (CRP), and 
alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AGP) during pregnancy. Women received vitamin B12 
supplementation (50 µg per day) or placebo daily; all women received daily 
prenatal iron-folic acid supplementation. Binomial and linear regression models 
were used to examine the associations of maternal iron biomarkers with pregnancy 
and infant outcomes.
RESULTS: Thirty percent of women were anaemic (Hb < 11.0 g/dl), 48% were iron 
deficient (SF < 15.0 µg/l), and 23% had iron deficiency anaemia at their first 
prenatal visit. The prevalence of inflammation (CRP > 5.0 mg/l: 17%; 
AGP > 1.0 g/l: 11%) and anaemia of inflammation (Hb < 11.0 g/dl, SF > 15.0 µg/l, 
plus CRP > 5.0 mg/l or AGP > 1.0 g/l: 2%) were low. Infants born to anaemic 
women had a twofold higher risk of low birth weight (<2500 g; risk ratio [RR]: 
2.15, 95%CI: 1.20-3.84, p = 0.01), preterm delivery (RR: 2.67 (1.43-5.00); 
p = 0.002), underweight (WAZ < -2; RR: 2.20, 95%CI: 1.16-4.15, p = 0.02), and 
lower MUAC (β(SE): -0.94 (0.45)cm, p = 0.03). Similarly, maternal Hb 
concentrations predicted higher infant birth weight (p = 0.02) and greater 
gestational age at delivery (β(SE): 0.28 (0.08) weeks, p = 0.001), lower risk of 
preterm delivery (<37 weeks; RR: 0.76, 95%CI: 0.66-86, p < 0.0001); and higher 
infant MUAC (β(SE): 0.36 (0.13) cm, p = 0.006). Maternal SF concentrations were 
associated with greater birth length (β(SE): 0.44 (0.20) cm, p < 0.03). Findings 
were similar after adjusting SF concentrations for inflammation. IDA was 
associated with higher risk of low birth weight (RR: 1.99 (1.08-3.68); p = 0.03) 
and preterm birth (RR: 3.46 (1.81-6.61); p = 0.0002); and lower birth weight 
(p = 0.02), gestational age at birth (p = 0.0002), and infant WAZ scores 
(p = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of anaemia and iron deficiency was high early in 
pregnancy and associated with increased risk of adverse pregnancy and infant 
outcomes. A comprehensive approach to prevent anaemia is needed in women of 
reproductive age, to enhance haematological status and improve maternal and 
child health outcomes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41430-019-0464-3
PMCID: PMC10122513
PMID: 31296936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


5. Ann Hematol. 2024 Aug;103(8):2637-2646. doi: 10.1007/s00277-023-05481-2. Epub 
2023 Oct 3.

Pathophysiology and management of iron deficiency anaemia in pregnancy: a 
review.

Kirthan JPA(1), Somannavar MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, JN Medical College, KLE Academy of Higher 
Education and Research, Nehru Nagar, Belgaum, 590010, Karnataka, India. 
akshay.kirthan.jp@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, JN Medical College, KLE Academy of Higher 
Education and Research, Nehru Nagar, Belgaum, 590010, Karnataka, India.

According to World Health Organization (WHO), iron deficiency anaemia (IDA) is 
considered the most prevalent nutritional deficiency worldwide, affecting 
approximately 30% of the global population. While gastrointestinal bleeding and 
menstruation in women are the primary causes of IDA, insufficient dietary iron 
intake and reduced iron absorption contribute to the condition. The aim of IDA 
treatment is to restore iron stores and normalise haemoglobin levels in affected 
patients. Iron plays a critical role in various cellular mechanisms, including 
oxygen delivery, electron transport, and enzymatic activity. During pregnancy, 
the mother's blood volume increases, and the growing foetus requires a 
significant increase in iron. Iron deficiency during pregnancy is associated 
with adverse outcomes such as maternal illness, low birth weight, preterm birth, 
and intrauterine growth restriction. Iron supplementation is commonly used to 
treat IDA; however, not all patients benefit from this therapy due to factors 
such as low compliance and ineffectiveness. In the past, IV iron therapy was 
underutilised due to its unfavourable and occasionally unsafe side effects. 
Nevertheless, the development of new type II and III iron complexes has improved 
compliance, tolerability, efficacy, and safety profiles. This article aims to 
provide an updated overview of the diagnosis and management of IDA during 
pregnancy. It will discuss the advantages and limitations of oral versus 
intravenous iron and the pathophysiology, diagnosis, treatment, and overall 
management of IDA in pregnancy.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-023-05481-2
PMID: 37787837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Cureus. 2022 Aug 29;14(8):e28565. doi: 10.7759/cureus.28565. eCollection 2022 
Aug.

Non-iron Deficiency Anemia in Rural Indian Women: A Cross-Sectional Study.

Saha S(1)(2), Puwar T(1)(3), Shah K(4), Pandya A(5), Wanjari MB(6), Saxena 
D(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Public Health, Indian Institute of Public Health Gandhinagar, Gandhinagar, 
IND.
(2)Public Health, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of 
Medical Sciences (Deemed to be University), Wardha, IND.
(3)Community Medicine, Indian Institute of Public Health Gandhinagar, 
Gandhinagar, IND.
(4)Public Health, Indian Institute of Public Health (IIPH) Gandhinagar, 
Ahmedabad, IND.
(5)Epidemiology and Public Health, Parul Institute of Public Health, Parul 
University, Vadodara, IND.
(6)Research and Development, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe 
Institute of Medical Sciences (Deemed to be University), Wardha, IND.
(7)School of Epidemiology and Public Health, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, 
Datta Meghe Institute of Medical Sciences (Deemed to be University), Wardha, 
IND.

Introduction Anemia is an important public health concern, affecting almost 25% 
of the global population. In India, these statistics are even more worrisome 
with more than half of the children, non-pregnant and pregnant women being 
affected by the disease. Though the major cause of anemia is iron deficiency, 
other causes cannot be neglected considering the magnitude of the problem. The 
present study was designed to estimate the prevalence of non-iron deficiency 
anemia (NIDA) in Devbhoomi Dwarka District of Gujarat. Methods For this 
cross-sectional study, total of 258 mothers (antenatal and postnatal) were 
enrolled from 27 primary health centers. Apart from demographic details and 
obstetric history, hemoglobin and ferritin levels were measured from the 
participant's blood after obtaining consent. Clinical information such as the 
history of recent illness and fever were also noted through questionnaires. 
Prevalence was anemia was calculated using a standard threshold of blood 
hemoglobin and NIDM was defined using ferritin levels. Results As per hemoglobin 
levels, anemia was present in 65.9% of the mothers, which was relatively higher 
in antenatal women (90%) as compared to postnatal women (57%). Ferritin levels 
showed that out of this total anemic mothers, 61.8% (105/258) have normal 
ferritin levels indicating the presence of non-iron deficiency. Trimester-wise 
analysis of anemia in AN showed that NIDM prevalence increases with increasing 
trimester in contrast to IDA where a considerable reduction was found with iron 
supplementation. Conclusion The study indicated that two out of every three 
women were anemic and only one out of four were anemic with depleted iron 
storage. These findings have important policy implications as in India the 
anemia control programs address only iron deficiency anemia and not NIDA. The 
development of a framework for diagnosis and appropriate treatment can be 
recommended for integration into national guidelines.

Copyright © 2022, Saha et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.28565
PMCID: PMC9520231
PMID: 36185907

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


7. Rev Bras Ginecol Obstet. 2024 Mar 15;46:e-rbgo21. doi: 10.61622/rbgo/2024AO21.
 eCollection 2024.

A meta-analysis of ferric carboxymaltose versus other intravenous iron 
preparations for the management of iron deficiency anemia during pregnancy.

Gupte S(1), Mukhopadhyay A(2), Puri M(3), Gopinath PM(4), Wani R(5), Sharma 
JB(6), Swami OC(7).

Author information:
(1)Gupte Hospital & Center for Research in Reproduction Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology India Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Gupte Hospital & 
Center for Research in Reproduction, India.
(2)CSS College of Obstetrics Gynae. & Child health Department of Gynecology 
Kolkata India Department of Gynecology, CSS College of Obstetrics, Gynae. & 
Child health, Kolkata, India.
(3)Lady Hardinge Medical College Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology New 
Delhi India Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Lady Hardinge Medical 
College, New Delhi, India.
(4)Institute of Obg & IVF SIMS Hospital Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology 
VadapalaniChennai India Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of 
Obg & IVF SIMS Hospital, Vadapalani, Chennai, India.
(5)HBTMC & Dr RN Cooper Hospital Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Mumbai 
India Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, HBTMC & Dr RN Cooper Hospital, 
Mumbai, India.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology AIIMSNew Delhi India Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, AIIMS, New Delhi, India.
(7)Emcure Pharmaceuticals Ltd Pune India Emcure Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Pune, 
India.

OBJECTIVE: We conducted a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials evaluating 
the clinical effects of ferric carboxymaltose therapy compared to other 
intravenous iron in improving hemoglobin and serum ferritin in pregnant women. 
We also assessed the safety of ferric carboxymaltose vs. other intravenous iron.
DATA SOURCE: EMBASE, PubMed, and Web of Science were searched for trials related 
to ferric carboxymaltose in pregnant women, published between 2005 and 2021. We 
also reviewed articles from google scholar. The keywords "ferric 
carboxymaltose," "FCM," "intravenous," "randomized," "pregnancy," "quality of 
life," and "neonatal outcomes" were used to search the literature. The search 
was limited to pregnant women.
SELECTION OF STUDIES: Studies related to ferric carboxymaltose in pregnancy were 
scanned. Observational studies, review articles, and case reports were excluded. 
Randomized studies in pregnant women involving ferric carboxymaltose and other 
intravenous iron formulations were shortlisted. Of 256 studies, nine randomized 
control trials were selected.
DATA COLLECTION: Two reviewers independently extracted data from nine selected 
trials.
DATA SYNTHESIS: The final effect size for increase in hemoglobin after treatment 
was significant for ferric carboxymaltose vs. iron sucrose/iron polymaltose 
(standard mean difference 0.89g/dl [95% confidence interval 0.27,1.51]). The 
final effect size for the increase in ferritin after treatment was more for 
ferric carboxymaltose vs. iron sucrose/iron polymaltose (standard mean 
difference 22.53µg/L [-7.26, 52.33]). No serious adverse events were reported 
with ferric carboxymaltose or other intravenous iron.
CONCLUSION: Ferric carboxymaltose demonstrated better efficacy than other 
intravenous iron in increasing hemoglobin and ferritin levels in treating iron 
deficiency anemia in pregnant women.

© 2024. Federação Brasileira de Ginecologia e Obstetrícia. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.61622/rbgo/2024AO21
PMCID: PMC11075392
PMID: 38765534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts to interest: none to declare.


8. Lancet Haematol. 2023 Sep;10(9):e713-e734. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00160-6.
 Epub 2023 Jul 31.

Prevalence, years lived with disability, and trends in anaemia burden by 
severity and cause, 1990-2021: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 
2021.

GBD 2021 Anaemia Collaborators.

Collaborators: Gardner WM, Razo C, McHugh TA, Hagins H, Vilchis-Tella VM, 
Hennessy C, Taylor HJ, Perumal N, Fuller K, Cercy KM, Zoeckler LZ, Chen CS, Lim 
SS, Aali A, Abate KH, Abd-Elsalam S, Abdurehman AM, Abebe G, Abidi H, Aboagye 
RG, Abolhassani H, Aboye GBA, Abtew YD, Accrombessi MMK, Adane DEA, Adane TD, 
Addo IY, Adesina MA, Adeyinka DA, Adnani QES, Afzal MS, Afzal S, Agustina R, 
Ahinkorah BO, Ahmad A, Ahmad S, Ahmadi S, Ahmed A, Ahmed Rashid T, Aiman W, 
Ajami M, Akbarialiabad H, Alahdab F, Al-Aly Z, Alam N, Alemayehu A, Alhassan RK, 
Ali MA, Almustanyir S, Al-Raddadi RM, Al-Rifai RH, Altirkawi KA, Alvand S, 
Alvis-Guzman N, Amer YSAD, Ameyaw EK, Amu H, Anagaw TF, Ancuceanu R, 
Anoushirvani AA, Antwi MH, Anvari D, Arabloo J, Aravkin AY, Ariffin H, Aripov T, 
Arja A, Arndt MB, Arulappan J, Aruleba RT, Ashraf T, Asresie MB, Athari SS, 
Atlaw D, Aujayeb A, Awoke AA, Awoke MA, Azadnajafabad S, Azangou-Khyavy M, B DB, 
Badawi A, Badiye AD, Baghcheghi N, Bagheri N, Bagherieh S, Baig AA, Banach M, 
Banik PC, Bantie AT, Barr RD, Barrow A, Bashiri A, Basu S, Batiha AM, Begum T, 
Belete MA, Belo L, Bensenor IM, Berhie AY, Bhagavathula AS, Bhardwaj N, Bhardwaj 
P, Bhat AN, Bhutta ZA, Bikbov B, Billah SM, Birara S, Bishai JD, Bitaraf S, 
Boloor A, Botelho JSB, Burkart K, Calina D, Cembranel F, Chakraborty PA, Chanie 
GS, Chattu VK, Chien JH, Chukwu IS, Chung E, Criqui MH, Cruz-Martins N, Dadras 
O, Dagnew GW, Dai X, Danawi HA, Dandona L, Dandona R, Darwesh AM, Das JK, Das S, 
De la Cruz-Góngora V, Demisse FW, Demissie S, Demsie DG, Desai HD, Desalegn MD, 
Dessalegn FN, Dessie G, Dharmaratne SD, Dhimal M, Dhingra S, Diaz D, Didehdar M, 
Dirac MA, Diress M, Doaei S, Dodangeh M, Doku PN, Dongarwar D, Dora BT, Dsouza 
HL, Edinur HA, Ekholuenetale M, Elagali AEM, Elbahnasawy MA, Elbarazi I, 
ElGohary GMT, Elhadi M, El-Huneidi W, Elmonem MA, Enyew DB, Eshetu HB, Ewald SB, 
Ezzeddini R, Fagbamigbe AF, Fasanmi AO, Fatehizadeh A, Fekadu G, Feyisa BR, 
Fischer F, Fitzgerald R, Foroutan M, Fowobaje KR, Gadanya MA, Gaidhane AM, 
Gaihre S, Gaipov A, Galali Y, Galehdar N, Garg P, Garg T, Gebremariam YH, 
Gebremedhin KB, Gebremichael B, Gela YY, Gerema U, Getacher L, Ghaffari K, 
Ghafourifard M, Ghamari SH, Ghasemi Nour M, Ghashghaee A, Gholamalizadeh M, 
Ghozy S, Gizaw ATT, Glasbey JC, Golechha M, Goleij P, Golitaleb M, Goulart AC, 
Goyomsa GG, Guadie HA, Gubari MIM, Gudisa Z, Gunawardane DA, Gupta R, Gupta RD, 
Gupta S, Gupta VK, Guta A, Habibzadeh P, Hamidi S, Handal AJ, Hanif A, Hannan 
MA, Harapan H, Harorani M, Hasaballah AI, Hasan MM, Hasani H, Hassankhani H, 
Hassen MB, Hay SI, Hayat K, Heidari G, Hess SY, Heyi DZ, Hezam K, Hiraike Y, 
Holla R, Hossain SJ, Hosseini K, Hosseini MS, Hosseinzadeh M, Hostiuc M, Hostiuc 
S, Huang J, Hussain S, Hussien FM, Ibitoye SE, Ilesanmi OS, Ilic IM, Immurana M, 
Inbaraj LR, Islam SMS, Ismail NE, J LM, Jamshidi E, Janodia MD, Jayarajah U, 
Jayaram S, Jebai R, Jemal B, Jeyakumar A, Jha RP, Jonas JB, Joseph N, Jozwiak 
JJ, Kabir A, Kalankesh LR, Kalhor R, Kamal VK, Kandel H, Kanko TK, Karaye IM, 
Kashoo FZ, Katoto PD, Kauppila JH, Kaur H, Kayode GA, Kebede AD, Keshri VR, 
Keykhaei M, Khader YS, Khajuria H, Khalid N, Khammarnia M, Khan IA, Khan MA, 
Khatab K, Khazaei Z, Khubchandani J, Kim YJ, Kimokoti RW, Kisa S, Kompani F, 
Kosen S, Koulmane Laxminarayana SL, Krishan K, Kuate Defo B, Kuddus M, Kumar GA, 
Kumar N, Kumar N, Kurmi OP, Kuti O, Lal DK, Landires I, Larsson AO, Lassi ZS, 
Latief K, Laxmaiah A, Ledda C, Lee SW, Legesse SM, Liu X, Lorenzovici L, Machado 
VSM, Mahajan PB, Mahjoub S, Mahmoodpoor A, Mahmoudi E, Malakan Rad E, Mallhi TH, 
Malta DC, Masoudi S, Masoumi SZ, Medina JRC, Mejia-Rodriguez F, Mendes JJM, 
Mendoza W, Mendoza-Cano O, Mentis AA, Meresa HA, Mestrovic T, Miazgowski T, 
Mirghafourvand M, Mirica A, Mirza M, Misganaw A, Misra S, Mohammad DK, Mohammadi 
S, Mohammed S, Mohan S, Moka N, Mokdad AH, Momtazmanesh S, Monasta L, Moni MA, 
Moosavi D, Moradi M, Mosapour A, Mostafavi E, Muche T, Mulita F, Mulu GB, Murray 
CJL, Musina AM, Mustafa G, Nagarajan AJ, Nair TS, Narasimha Swamy S, 
Nassereldine H, Natto ZS, Nayak BP, Naz S, Negoi I, Negoi RI, Nguefack-Tsague G, 
Ngunjiri JW, Niazi RK, Noori M, Nowroozi A, Nurrika D, Nuruzzaman KM, Nzoputam 
OJ, Oancea B, Obaidur RM, Obsa MMSS, Odhiambo JN, Ogunsakin RE, Okati-Aliabad H, 
Okonji OC, Oladunjoye AO, Oladunjoye OO, Olagunju AT, Olufadewa II, Omar Bali A, 
Omonisi AEE, Ortiz A, Owolabi MO, Padubidri JR, Pakzad R, Palicz T, Pandey A, 
Pandya AK, Papadopoulou P, Pardhan S, Patel J, Pathak A, Pathan AR, Paudel R, 
Paudel U, Pawar S, Pereira G, Perico N, Perna S, Perumalsamy N, Petcu IR, 
Pickering BV, Piracha ZZ, Pollok RCG, Pradhan PMS, Prashant A, Qattea I, Quazi 
Syed Z, Rahim F, Rahimi M, Rahman A, Rahman MHU, Rahman M, Rahmani AM, Rahmani 
S, Rai RK, Raimondo I, Rajaa S, Ram P, Rana J, Ranjha MMAN, Rao CR, Rao SJ, 
Rashedi S, Rashidi MM, Rawaf S, Rawal L, Raza RZ, Redwan EMM, Remuzzi G, Rezaei 
M, Rezaei N, Rezaei N, Richards T, Rickard J, Rodriguez JAB, Roever L, Roshandel 
G, Roy B, Rwegerera GM, Saad AMA, Sabour S, Saddik B, Sadeghi M, Sadeghian S, 
Saeed U, Sahebkar A, Sahoo H, Salem MR, Samy AM, Sankararaman S, Santoro R, 
Santos IS, Satpathy M, Saya GK, Seboka BT, Senbeta AM, Senthilkumaran S, Seylani 
A, Shafeghat M, Shah PA, Shaikh MA, Shanawaz M, Shannawaz M, Sharew MMS, Sharma 
P, Sheikhi RA, Shenoy SM, Shetty A, Shetty BSK, Shetty JK, Shetty PH, Shin JI, 
Shivalli S, Shivarov V, Shobeiri P, Shorofi SA, Sikder MK, Sima AR, Simegn W, 
Singh JA, Singh NP, Singh P, Singh S, Siraj MS, Sisay Y, Skryabina AA, Solomon 
Y, Song Y, Sorensen RJD, Stanaway JD, Suchdev PS, Sufiyan MB, Sultana S, Szeto 
MD, Tabaeian SP, Tahamtan A, Taheri M, Taheri Soodejani M, Tamir Z, Tan KK, 
Tariqujjaman M, Tarkang EE, Tat NY, Tefera YM, Temsah MH, Thapar R, Thiyagarajan 
A, Ticoalu JHV, Tigabu BM, Tiyuri A, Tobe-Gai R, Tovani-Palone MR, Tran MTN, 
Tusa BS, Ullah I, Umer AA, Unnikrishnan B, Vacante M, Valadan Tahbaz S, Valdez 
PR, Vart P, Varthya SB, Vaziri S, Verma MV, Veroux M, Vervoort D, Vu LG, Wagaye 
B, Weldegebreal F, Wickramasinghe ND, Woldemariam M, Wonde TE, Wubetie GA, Xu X, 
Yari K, Yazdanpanah F, Yehualashet SS, Yigit A, Yiğit V, Yisihak E, Yon DK, 
Yonemoto N, Young MF, Yu C, Yunusa I, Zahir M, Zaki L, Zaman BA, Zamora N, Zare 
I, Zareshahrabadi Z, Zenebe GA, Zhang ZJ, Zheng P, Zoladl M, Kassebaum NJ.

Erratum in
    Lancet Haematol. 2023 Oct;10(10):e796. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00283-1.
    Lancet Haematol. 2024 Jan;11(1):e10. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00373-3.

Comment in
    Lancet Haematol. 2023 Sep;10(9):e702-e704. doi: 
10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00168-0.

BACKGROUND: Anaemia is a major health problem worldwide. Global estimates of 
anaemia burden are crucial for developing appropriate interventions to meet 
current international targets for disease mitigation. We describe the 
prevalence, years lived with disability, and trends of anaemia and its 
underlying causes in 204 countries and territories.
METHODS: We estimated population-level distributions of haemoglobin 
concentration by age and sex for each location from 1990 to 2021. We then 
calculated anaemia burden by severity and associated years lived with disability 
(YLDs). With data on prevalence of the causes of anaemia and associated 
cause-specific shifts in haemoglobin concentrations, we modelled the proportion 
of anaemia attributed to 37 underlying causes for all locations, years, and 
demographics in the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021.
FINDINGS: In 2021, the global prevalence of anaemia across all ages was 24·3% 
(95% uncertainty interval [UI] 23·9-24·7), corresponding to 1·92 billion 
(1·89-1·95) prevalent cases, compared with a prevalence of 28·2% (27·8-28·5) and 
1·50 billion (1·48-1·52) prevalent cases in 1990. Large variations were observed 
in anaemia burden by age, sex, and geography, with children younger than 5 
years, women, and countries in sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia being 
particularly affected. Anaemia caused 52·0 million (35·1-75·1) YLDs in 2021, and 
the YLD rate due to anaemia declined with increasing Socio-demographic Index. 
The most common causes of anaemia YLDs in 2021 were dietary iron deficiency 
(cause-specific anaemia YLD rate per 100 000 population: 422·4 [95% UI 
286·1-612·9]), haemoglobinopathies and haemolytic anaemias (89·0 [58·2-123·7]), 
and other neglected tropical diseases (36·3 [24·4-52·8]), collectively 
accounting for 84·7% (84·1-85·2) of anaemia YLDs.
INTERPRETATION: Anaemia remains a substantial global health challenge, with 
persistent disparities according to age, sex, and geography. Estimates of 
cause-specific anaemia burden can be used to design locally relevant health 
interventions aimed at improving anaemia management and prevention.
FUNDING: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00160-6
PMCID: PMC10465717
PMID: 37536353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests S Afzal reports 
participation on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board with the 
National Bioethics Committee of Pakistan, King Edward Medical University 
Institutional Review Board, and the Ethics Review Board in Board of Studies; a 
leadership or fiduciary role with the Pakistan Association of Medical Editors, 
as a Fellow of Faculty of Public Health (FFPH) Royal Colleges UK, and an 
advocacy role in the Society of Prevention and Advocacy Research with King 
Edward Medical University, Lahore, Pakistan, all outside the submitted work. R 
Agustina reports leadership or fiduciary roles with the Multiple Micronutrient 
Supplementation Technical Advisory Group of the New York Academy of Sciences and 
with the Indonesia Technical Advisory Board for Multimicronutrient 
Supplemenation, outside the submitted work. R Ancuceanu reports payment or 
honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or 
educational events from AbbVie, Sandoz, B Braun, and Laropharm, outside the 
submitted work. S Das is a member of the Personalized Medicine Division of the 
American Association of Clinical Chemistry and a member of the Royal College of 
Biology; and reports other financial interests through a research grant of 1·6 
million INR from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India; 
all outside the submitted work. C Hennessy reports support for the present work 
from the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation and the Center for Health 
System Effectiveness. N E Ismail is a council member of the Malaysian Academy of 
Pharmacy, outside the submitted work. J J Jozwiak reports payment or honoraria 
for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational 
events from Novartis and Adamed as personal payments, outside the submitted 
work. N J Kassebaum reports support for this manuscript from the Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation as grant payments to their institution (Institute of Health 
Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA). K Krishan 
reports non-financial support from UGC Centre of Advanced Study, CAS II, 
Department of Anthropology, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India, outside the 
submitted work. W Mendoza is a staff member at the UNFPA Peru Country Office, 
which does not necessarily endorse these results. A-F A Mentis reports grants or 
contracts from MilkSafe: a novel pipeline to enrich formula milk using omics 
technologies, a project co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund of 
the European Union and Greek national funds through the Operational Program 
Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the call RESEARCH – 
CREATE – INNOVATE (project code T2EDK-02222) and from ELIDEK (Hellenic 
Foundation for Research and Innovation, MIMS-860); has received payment for 
expert testimony as a peer-reviewer for Fondazione Cariplo, Italy; serves as an 
editorial board member for the journals Systematic Reviews and Annals of 
Epidemiology, and as an Associate Editor for Translational Psychiatry; and is a 
scientific officer with the BGI Group; all outside the submitted work. N Moka is 
Treasurer of the Kentucky Society of Clinical Oncology, outside the submitted 
work. A Ortiz reports grants or contracts from Sanofi as payments to their 
institution (IIS-Fundacion Jiménez Díaz UAM, Madrid, Spain); consulting fees 
from Advicienne, Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca, Amicus Therapeutics, Amgen, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Fresenius Medical Care, GSK, Bayer, Sanofi-Genzyme, 
Menarini, Mundipharma, Kyowa Kirin, Lilly, Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Freeline 
Therapeutics, Idorsia, Chiesi, Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Novo Nordisk, Sysmex, and 
Vifor Fresenius Medical Care Renal Pharma; support for travel from Advicienne, 
Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca, Amicus Therapeutics, Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Fresenius Medical Care, GSK, Bayer, Sanofi-Genzyme, Menarini, Mundipharma, Kyowa 
Kirin, Lilly, Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Freeline Therapeutics, Idorsia, Chiesi, 
Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Novo Nordisk, Sysmex, and Vifor Fresenius Medical Care 
Renal Pharma; a leadership or fiduciary role with the European Renal 
Association, a role as Director of the Catedra Mundipharma-UAM of diabetic 
kidney disease and the Catedra AstraZeneca-UAM of chronic kidney disease and 
electrolytes; and stock or stock options in Telara Pharma; all outside the 
submitted work. Z Quazi Syed reports support for this manuscript from the South 
Asia Infant Feeding Research Network and Datta Meghe Institute of Higher 
Education and Research, Wardha, India; grants or contracts from the Global 
Consortium for Public Health and Research and Datta Meghe Institute of Higher 
Education and Research; support for attending meetings and/or travel from the 
Division of Evidence Synthesis, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Wardha, India, 
and Datta Meghe Institute of Medical Sciences, Wardha, India, outside the 
submitted work. T Richards reports grants or contracts from Vifor Pharma for 
PREVENT laboratory analysis; consulting fees from BioAge Labs for a clinical 
trial design; payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers 
bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from Pharmacosmos through the 
CAVIAR education grant and from Pfizer for the IRONWOMAN trial; support for 
attending meetings from Pfizer, Pharmacosmos, and Vifor Pharma; a role as 
treasurer with NATA; and a role as Director of The Iron Clinic; all outside the 
submitted work. V Shivarov is an employee of ICON and reports stock or stock 
options in the company, all outside the submitted work. J A Singh reports 
consulting fees from Crealta/Horizon, MediSys, Fidia Farmaceutici, PK Med, Two 
Labs, Adept Field Solutions, Clinical Care Options, Clearview Healthcare 
Partners, Putnam Associates, Focus Forward, Navigant Consulting, Spherix Global 
Insights, Mediq, Jupiter Life Science, UBM, Trio Health, Medscape, WebMD, and 
Practice Point Communications, the National Institutes of Health, and the 
American College of Rheumatology; payment or honoraria for speakers bureaus from 
Simply Speaking; support for attending meetings or travel from the steering 
committee of OMERACT; participation on a data safety monitoring board or 
advisory board with the US Food and Drug Administration Arthritis Advisory 
Committee; membership of the steering committee of OMERACT, a role as Chair 
(unpaid) of the Veterans Affairs Rheumatology Field Advisory Committee, and 
roles as Editor and Director (unpaid) with the UAB Cochrane Musculoskeletal 
Group Satellite Center on Network Meta-analysis; stock or stock options in TPT 
Global Tech, Vaxart Pharmaceuticals, Aytu BioPharma, Adaptimmune Therapeutics, 
GeoVax Labs, Pieris Pharmaceuticals, Enzolytics, Seres Therapeutics, Tonix 
Pharmaceuticals, and Charlotte's Web Holdings, and previous stock options in 
Amarin, Viking Therapeutics, and Moderna Pharmaceuticals; all outside the 
submitted work. J D Stanaway reports support for this manuscript from the Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation as grants to their institution (Institute of Health 
Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA). P S Suchdev 
reports grants or contracts from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, all outside the submitted work. M 
F Young reports grants from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the CDC for 
a project titled Biomarkers reflecting inflammation and nutritional determinants 
of anemia (BRINDA) and from the National Institutes of Health for a project 
titled Mother–child hemoglobin at preconception and first 1000 days and child 
development at 6 years; roles in the Lancet Haematology Commission on anaemia, 
the Anaemia Evidence Gap Map Advisory Group, as a subject matter expert on the 
advisory committee related to the Improving Estimates of Anemia in Global Burden 
of Disease research project, as a member of the technical advisory group for the 
Redefining Maternal Anaemia in Pregnancy and Postpartum project and a member of 
the WHO Guideline Development Group for Anemia; all outside the submitted work. 
All other authors declare no competing interests.