SOURCE: Times of India — Food Facts
TITLE: Difference between dry ginger and fresh ginger, and which one is best
URL: https://recipes.timesofindia.com/articles/food-facts/difference-between-dry-ginger-and-fresh-ginger-and-which-one-is-best/articleshow/103880542.cms
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Ginger, a versatile and aromatic spice, has been an integral part of global cuisine and traditional medicine for centuries. Whether used for its bold flavour, culinary prowess, or medicinal properties, ginger remains a cherished ingredient in various forms. There are two primary variations of ginger - dry and fresh which offer distinct attributes when it comes to usage, nutrition, and health benefits. Here is all you need to find out about these two varieties, that can help you make informed choices.
When it comes to nutrition, fresh ginger boasts a range of health benefits attributed to its natural form and the presence of active compounds like gingerol. It helps in digestion while reducing nausea, bloating, and indigestion. Fresh ginger also has anti-inflammatory properties that may alleviate symptoms of arthritis and reduce muscle pain. It is rich in antioxidants and vitamin C, and can boost the immune system. It is commonly used to alleviate morning sickness during pregnancy.
While the drying process can cause a slight loss in some nutrients, dry ginger retains many beneficial properties and it may help in providing relief from inflammatory conditions like osteoarthritis. Dry ginger's concentrated compounds can help combat infections and inhibit the growth of harmful bacteria. Some studies suggest that dry ginger may help lower blood sugar levels. Similar to fresh ginger, dry ginger can help alleviate nausea and motion sickness.
While fresh and dry ginger each offer unique flavours and they have their unique applications in the culinary world, they differ a lot nutritionally. Both forms of ginger cater to a variety of needs and the choice between fresh and dry ginger depends on your culinary preferences and the specific dish you're preparing. Whether you prefer the bold and zesty profile of fresh ginger or the convenience and versatility of dry ginger powder, there's no denying that ginger, in any form, is a spice worth including in your daily repertoire for both its flavour and potential health perks.
Uses of dry gingerIt is often used in cooking items with a longer shelf life. From laddoos, pinnis to mathris, use of dry ginger in the form of powder gives the perfect taste and aroma without disturbing the shelf life of the food items. Also, in case you are running short of fresh ginger at home, you can use dry ginger as the perfect alternative. The powder can also be used for Ginger Baths. All you need to do is, mix 1 tablespoon of dry ginger powder and mix it with an equal amount of baking soda. Rub it gently on the body for cleaning and see the magic.