SOURCE: Times of India — Food Facts
TITLE: This is how freshly harvested fruits and vegetables help avoid several fatal diseases
URL: https://recipes.timesofindia.com/articles/food-facts/this-is-how-freshly-harvested-fruits-and-vegetables-help-avoid-several-fatal-diseases/articleshow/96822103.cms
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

As more people become cognizant of what they buy and put on their plates, there is a growing demand for farm-fresh vegetables and healthy alternatives. Organic vegetables are alive, as opposed to conventional vegetables, which are waxed and sprayed with chemicals, effectively mummifying them. Making chemical-free fresh veggies commercially feasible may sound unreasonable, but this does exist in the market.
Food not only nourishes our bodies but also our minds and souls. A toxin-free diet is the simplest approach to a healthy body and a happy mind. That’s why treating nature the way it should be treated, homegrown e-commerce platforms are allowing us to give the freshest produce possible, free of harmful pesticides and chemicals that disrupt our physical and mental wellness.
The process that these organic sources follow is, that they handpick farm-fresh vegetables from authentic and trusted aggregators who work with organic farmers and put them through their three-stage cleaning process to completely remove any pesticides and chemicals that may have been utilized. These vegetables have traveled from locally farmed fields across India and are rigorously checked in the warehouse before being delivered to customers’ doorsteps. The vegetables are then transported to our warehouses, where they are processed, graded, and packaged in various sizes.
“The safety of everyone involved in edobo’s delivery chain is our priority”, claims Ravi Jadhwani, the Founder & CEO of edobo, who aimed to get something new to the table for the public in a country like India, where there are numerous startups in every sector. He further explains, “We follow the Best Safety Standards, which includes mandatory temperature checks at warehouses, periodical cleansing of storage facilities, and UV-controlled sanitization and packaging of items.”
One significant advantage of using a UV light for disinfection is that it is chemical-free, which protects the staff, customers, and equipment from the potentially dangerous effects of certain chemicals. It successfully eliminates up to 99.9% of the most dangerous foodborne bacteria. This provides insurance not just against regions that may have been missed during routine cleaning, but also against areas that may not be easily disinfected with chemicals. UV-C successfully sterilizes and extends the shelf life of vegetables without compromising their structure or taste, demonstrating that it is a valuable option to chemical alternatives.
Numerous studies have revealed that diets rich in freshly harvested fruits and vegetables help avoid several fatal diseases and are also beneficial to the skin and hair. By opting for organic vegetables, we make a commitment to live sustainably for our world and ourselves. We take an extremely significant step toward safeguarding our families, our farmers, and our soils.
One-touch delivery is made possible by e-commerce platforms that offer organic vegetables by serving as a direct link to farmers. The vegetables are delivered straight from suppliers that employ sustainable farming methods and best practices to avoid using pesticides and other chemicals and to maintain the nutritious value of all the vegetables grown on their farms.
So, why wait? Order a basket of the choicest, chemical-free greens and leafies from the comfort of your home.
Thumb and Embed Images Courtesy: istock