SOURCE: Times of India — Food Facts
TITLE: Why cooking food in stoneware is a healthy practice
URL: https://recipes.timesofindia.com/articles/food-facts/why-cooking-food-in-stoneware-is-a-healthy-practice/articleshow/106327298.cms
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

In the age of ceramic, glassware, and non-sticks, cooking food in dull-looking stoneware might sound bizarre. But if you look at the nutritional benefits and its other properties, you might find it pleasing enough to make a switch. If food historians are to be believed, centuries ago, stoneware was the only medium to cook food, and people sweared by it for its ability to enhance flavors, retain heat, and provide a natural, chemical-free cooking surface. In this article, we will tell you the many reasons to make a wise switch to stoneware.
Even heat distribution: As per those who have used it, stoneware is known for its exceptional heat retention and distribution capabilities. It absorbs and distributes heat evenly, ensuring that food cooks uniformly, which results in better flavors and textures.
Naturally non-stick: Yes, they are naturally non-stick, without any synthetic coatings or chemicals. As you use them, they become smoother with time and develop a patina that naturally enhances its non-stick properties.
Versatile in nature: From sautéing to deep-frying and roasting to baking, they can be used for anything and everything. The versatility of stoneware makes it a must-have kitchen essential.
Durable: Stoneware is said to be durable and built to last. Unlike other cookware materials, stoneware doesn't chip, warp, or wear out over time. They are also categorized as nature-friendly and sustainable.
Chemical-free cooking: As per experts, stoneware offers a safe and natural cooking alternative with no added chemical or non-stick coatings that slowly enter the food when heated.
Easy to maintain: They are very rustic and surprisingly easy to clean and maintain. It is suggested to use a mild dishwashing liquid and foam to gently clean it, and then season it with a few drops of oil to increase the glaze and shelf life.
Thumb and Embed Images Courtesy: istock and DINOIDA