SOURCE: Times of India — Food Facts
TITLE: This Indian breakfast has all nutrients in one bowl
URL: https://recipes.timesofindia.com/articles/food-facts/this-indian-breakfast-has-all-nutrients-in-one-bowl/articleshow/104440530.cms
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Every region in India has a unique breakfast tradition, which is a wonderful amalgamation of local ingredients, fresh produce and regional taste preferences. However, there is one Indian breakfast, which is made with more or less the same ingredients and is loaded with nutrition in every bite.
Dahi Poha, which is known as Jolpan in Assam, Doi Cheera in Bengal and
Dahi Chura in Bihar. This breakfast delight is one of the most power packed breakfast delights and here all you need to know about this traditional Indian breakfast treat.
What is Dahi Poha?Dahi Poha is a traditional Indian breakfast dish made using flattened rice (poha) and curd (dahi), sugar/jaggery/date jaggery, freshly grated coconut and milk in some regions. There are several regional variations of this one dish, here are some of the reasons that make this dish a healthy Indian breakfast.
Rich in carbohydratesPoha or flattened rice is rich in carbohydrates, which are a primary source of energy. It's a good option for those looking for an energy boost in the morning without feeling heavy.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/videos/lifestyle/health-fitness/hidden-dangers-of-excessive-milk-consumption/videoshow/103775840.cms
ProteinCurd and milk makes for a healthy source of healthy milk fats, calcium, and protein. Moreover, curd is naturally rich in probiotics that are great for digestion and gut health. Curd promotes the growth of healthy gut bacteria, aiding digestion and potentially boosting the immune system.
FiberPoha contains some dietary fiber, which can aid in digestion and promote a feeling of fullness.
Low in fat If you use low-fat milk and curd, jaggery/honey, Dahi Poha can make for a low-fat breakfast option.
UnprocessedPoha is a minimally processed food, which means it retains most of its nutrients compared to highly processed cereals.
Curd for weight loss Curd is a perfect for weight loss and is considered an excellent fat burner. It contains calcium which keeps the BMI levels in check and the probiotics in curd keeps the digestive system healthy and also improves metabolism, which altogether boost weight loss.
Note: The key to reap the benefits of this healthy breakfast is to keep in mind the portion control and avoid excessive addition of sugar, milk, which may lead to weight gain.