SOURCE: Times of India — Food Facts
TITLE: Kudrum, the unexplored winter fruit from Bihar and why the world is seeking it out
URL: https://recipes.timesofindia.com/articles/food-facts/kudrum-the-unexplored-winter-fruit-from-bihar-and-why-the-world-is-seeking-it-out/articleshow/95693915.cms
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Come winter and the markets of Bhagalpur are flooded with a pink leathery flower called Kudrum by the locals. Rina Sharma, a teacher in the city's convent school and a foodie, excitedly picks up the smaller fruits from the vegetable vendor's willow basket. "The smaller ones are less tangy and are ideal for chutney," she explains. "It is the winter favourite of our town-just like karonda, tilkut and ghevar which are available only during this season."
This city in South Bihar has a unique cultural milieu which is a mix of Brahmin, Kayastha, Bengali, and Muslim influences. The culinary traditions here, like other parts of the state, are dominated by seasonal produce. And Kudrum turns out to be an essential part of the winter diet. Sanjay Yadav who owns a fruit and vegetable shop in the town explains, "We sell a lot of Kudrum in the season as it is loved by people due to its sweet and tangy taste, it is said to be full of nutrition and also because people have started growing it more as they say there is a demand in the international market and soon we will be exporting it.''
It may seem like a little exaggeration but the fact is, Kudrum is not just a popular local winter veggie of Bihar but also the object of interest in the international market. Known as Roselle, this raw fibre plant grows in many parts of the world. Known as Hibiscus sabdariffa scientifically, this plant is considered commercially viable for a number of reasons.
A sustainable substitute for jute and other industrial usesInterestingly, the Roselle plant is grown in India and other South Asian countries not as much for their fruits as for the stem which is a sustainable and eco-friendly source of natural fiber. Its fibers are soft, white, and strong and it is often used along with jute for bagging fabrics and twines. It is also exported to several European countries, particularly Germany, and also to the United States as it is used there in making natural food coloring. Other commercial uses include making jams, jellies, and syrups. It is also used in making some Ayurvedic medicines.
As traditional medicineKudrum has been part of folk medicine since times immemorial. It is believed to act as a laxative, prevents water retention, acts as a coolant, helps in the quick healing of cracks, sores, and wounds, and also in easing sore throat.
Culinary usesKnown as Gongura in Andhra, Takabhendi in Orissa, and Pundi Palle in Karnataka, it has diverse culinary uses across the Subcontinent. The leaves are often used as a spicier version of spinach and the fruit is used in curries, chutneys, drinks, and desserts. In Philippines, the leaves and flowers are used to add sourness to meat curries and in Vietnam the leaves, stems, and fruits are used in eel and fish soup. The flowers are used as an exotic ingredient in high end gourmet restaurants. It is also used in making wine in Vietnam and some African countries.
Kudrum Chutney RecipeOne of the easiest and most popular recipes, this chutney is an integral part of Bihari cuisine. Full of flavours and nutrition, it goes well with the staple dal chawal as well as vegetable-stuffed parathas.
Ingredients required1 cup Kudrum, 2-3 garlic cloves, 1-inch ginger, 1 green chilli, 2 tbsp water, 1 tsp mustard oil, black salt, and 1 tsp sugar.
ProcessRemove the petals of the Kudrum flower. Throw away the seeds. Add the petals to blender jar along with other ingredients. Grind. The chutney is ready.
Thumb and Embed Images Courtesy: istock