SOURCE: Times of India — Food Facts
TITLE: Foods to include in diet during pregnancy
URL: https://recipes.timesofindia.com/articles/food-facts/foods-to-include-in-diet-during-pregnancy/articleshow/101308025.cms
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

A woman's life and body undergo many changes during pregnancy. Nutrition suddenly becomes an important factor to take care of to support baby's growth and development during this time. A balanced diet is very important during this time. Neha Ranglani, an integrative nutritionist and health coach, offers insightful information about the foods one should eat when pregnant to throw light on this crucial subject:
Calcium-rich foodsThe body needs more calcium during pregnancy to promote the growth of the unborn child's bones and teeth. Include nuts like almonds in your diet. Almonds are high in calcium (contain 269 mg per 100 g serving). Calcium contributes to normal energy-yielding metabolism. Include dairy items such as milk, cheese, and yogurt in your diet. You can also choose fortified plant-based milk substitutes like soy milk if you have a lactose intolerance or eat a vegan diet. Apart from almonds, leafy green vegetables are also a great source of calcium.
Omega-3 fatty acidsDHA (docosahexaenoic acid), a type of omega-3 fatty acid, is vital for your baby's brain and eye development. Include fatty fish in your diet high in omega-3 fatty acids, such as mackerel, sardines, and salmon. You can still acquire DHA from plant-based foods like flaxseeds, walnuts, and chia seeds if you don't eat fish. Alternatively, consider taking a high-quality omega-3 supplement after speaking with your doctor.
Protein-packed foodsBoth you and your unborn child's tissues need protein to develop and repair. To meet your protein needs, include lean meats, poultry, fish, eggs, dairy, lentils, and tofu in your meals. Non-meat eaters have great options in vegetarian sources like almonds, lentils, chickpeas, quinoa, and Greek yogurt. Almonds are a source of high protein and contribute to maintaining normal bones.
Colourful fruits and vegetablesFruits and vegetables are packed with vitamins, minerals, and fiber. Aim to include various colourful options in your diet to ensure you receive a wide range of nutrients. Broccoli, bell peppers, carrots, berries, oranges, mangoes, and papayas are nutritious and delicious. However, it is crucial to wash them thoroughly to eliminate any potential bacteria or pesticides.
Iron-rich foodsHaemoglobin, which delivers oxygen to your unborn child and helps avoid anemia throughout pregnancy, is produced with the help of iron, which is essential for this process. Lean meats, chicken, fish, beans, almonds, lentils, and whole grains fortified with iron should all be included in your diet. Iron absorption can be improved by eating these meals and vitamin C-rich foods like citrus fruits or bell peppers.