SOURCE: Times of India — Food Facts
TITLE: Chef explains how food helps in creating an experience
URL: https://recipes.timesofindia.com/articles/food-facts/chef-explains-how-food-helps-in-creating-an-experience/articleshow/100331278.cms
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Beyond Dining, an experiential dining service, talks about how
food helps in creating an unforgettable experience.
Whenever we travel, we bring back memories and souvenirs to remember the days that we cherished. What keeps our memories deeply rooted in the experiences are the regional foods that we relish when visiting the destination. Let’s understand the role of food in creating an experience of its kind.
We all connect with the destinations that we travel to and bring back memories to cherish for a lifetime. Our sojourns go beyond the excitement of just the commute, but to experience the place, and its historical importance, converse with the people there, experience their new-age offerings and most importantly dive deep into their culture with the oldest form of non-verbal communication – i.e. the regional recipes.
Yes, food plays a very important role in binding our memories together about a destination that we visit. Just try and cite the memories about your recent offsite to your friends without mentioning the local food that you enjoyed there. It’s very difficult for either you or your friends to listen to it with the same depth. About the culinary experience, we all get passionate about it as it adds color to our experience!
In India, we have a Sanskrit phrase- “Anna He Purna Brahma” which means Food is next to God, and it’s the whole creation that exists. May it be the breakfast, brunch, lovely lunches or inspired meals, etc., it becomes central to the experience that we are living. Every single guest leaves a destination with a memory of the food in their mind. The taste will be remembered for a long!
In the current digital era, we live in a connected world wherein we can read and imbibe knowledge about specific cultures and their regional ingredients to know in advance what we can experience during our visit there. Researching in advance to bringing back a regional spice, condiment, or ingredient to use in our kitchens as we cherish the bygone days, food tends to be an intangible souvenir that we all connect over!
When it comes to travelling to new places, it brings back tonnes of food memories. Be it having the most sought-after dishes of the region at a fine-dine restaurant there or participating in a community kitchen food preparation process to engage with the locals and learn about their unique cooking styles and the cultural importance of the foods that they consume, etc.
Ireland, the riverside destination is popular for its mussel and oyster farms that host tours scooping out the meat freshly and consuming it fresh out of the water. The oceanic mouthfeel cannot be described in words! Seaweed foraging in Ireland and then creating Seaweed inspired cuisine is what I have brought back as one of the dearest memories of my tour to Ireland. When in London, it has to be those warm scones and clotted cream for an ideal afternoon tea session. Thailand is popular for its seafood but one must try their crispy fish in spicy and tangy tamarind sauce served with fresh herbs – it is truly laudable!
Food is often used as means of retaining cultural identity. Each region has a unique culturally influenced food to serve.
Sharing these invaluable moments creates everlasting memories and potentially new friends for future culinary adventures. Food and its origin don’t necessarily stop at restaurants, but their tales go far beyond the remotest locales of the region. The more you engage with a specific culture’s food by cooking and eating it yourself, the higher the chances of becoming curious about where it came from, why they eat it and how can one benefit from consuming these foods. The desire to engage in that culture hence arises. By indulging in local cuisine, we not only satisfy our taste buds but also connect with the local community and gain a deeper understanding of the place we are visiting. So, the next time you travel, make sure to step out of your comfort zone and try the local cuisine. You might just discover a new favorite dish or create a lasting memory that you will cherish for years to come.