SOURCE: Times of India — Food Facts
TITLE: 5 Spice teas for weight loss
URL: https://recipes.timesofindia.com/articles/health/5-spice-teas-for-weight-loss/articleshow/104689941.cms
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

As per Ayurveda, spices and herbs are naturally rich in potent medicinal benefits and can instantly amp up the taste quotient and boost overall health. These common spices can help boost metabolism, control appetite, and regulate blood sugar levels to name a few. So, here are some common kitchen spices, which can help in effective weight loss too without putting in much effort.
Cinnamon TeaCinnamon is known for its ability to regulate blood sugar levels and improve insulin sensitivity, which can help reduce sugar cravings. To make cinnamon tea, simply steep a cinnamon stick or a half teaspoon of ground cinnamon in hot water.
Ginger Tea Ginger has a thermogenic effect, meaning it can boost metabolism and help burn more calories. It also aids in digestion and can reduce inflammation. To make ginger tea, add freshly grated ginger or ginger slices to hot water and steep.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/videos/lifestyle/health-fitness/powerful-ancient-herb-that-can-fight-cancer/videoshow/104240698.cms
Turmeric TeaTurmeric contains curcumin, which has anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. It may support weight loss by reducing inflammation and promoting overall health. Golden milk is made by simmering turmeric, black pepper, and other spices in milk or a milk substitute.
Black Pepper TeaBlack Pepper tea contains essential antioxidants and compounds, which can increase metabolism and reduce appetite. You can make pepper tea by adding a pinch of pepper to hot water, along with lemon and honey for flavour.
Fennel seeds can help control appetite and reduce food cravings. They also aid in digestion. To make fennel seed tea, steep a teaspoon of fennel seeds in hot water.
Cumin Seed TeaIt is also effective in weight loss. It is said that regular use of cumin may help you burn extra calories, increase the metabolism, and stabilize the digestion, which further aid in weight loss.