SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Video claiming eating bitter guard or radish over ladyfinger is harmful is fake as per doctors
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-video-claiming-eating-bitter-guard-or-radish-over-ladyfinger-is-harmful-is-fake-as-per-doctors/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Video claiming eating bitter guard or radish over ladyfinger is harmful is fake as per doctors
- Published: Dec 27, 2019 at 05:52 PM
A viral video on social media claims that one should not eat bitter guard after consuming ladyfinger as it will cause poison in the stomach. The video further claims that consuming radish after ladyfinger can cause Leukoderma, a skin disease. Vishvas News investigated by contacting medical practitioners and found that the viral post is fake.
A video circulating across social media and covered by many media outlets claims that one should not eat bitter guard after consuming lady finger as it will cause poison in the stomach. The video further claims that consuming radish after lady finger can cause Leukoderma, a skin disease. You can see the achieved version of the video here.
Here are some screenshots of posts shared by various users across social media:
We searched online reports on whether the combination of ladyfinger with bitter guard creates poison or a combination of consuming radish over ladyfinger cause skin disease. We did not find any report supporting such claim.
There was no scientific evidence that reported that such combination is harmful.
Instead, there are recipes online that have bitter guard and ladyfinger as ingredients.
An Ayurveda doctor, Dr. Vimal N. commented by quoting: There is no scientific evidence which supports that eating bitter guard over ladyfinger can cause poison or eating radish over ladyfinger caused skin disease. This is not mentioned in any traditional text. In fact, mooli is good for most of the toxins.
Dr. (Mrs) Mudasir Rashid Khan who is a dermatologist said: This is a fake news. There is no evidence to support this claim.
The video claiming that eating bitter guard or radish over ladyfinger is harmful is fake as per doctors.
- Claim Review : Eating bitter guard or radish over lady finger is harmful
- Claimed By : FB user: Krishna Pratap Singh
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.