SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Post claiming noodles being surgically removed from intestines is fake
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-post-claiming-noodles-being-surgically-removed-from-intestines-is-fake/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Post claiming noodles being surgically removed from intestines is fake
- Published: Sep 4, 2019 at 06:21 PM
A visually disturbing video is doing rounds on social media claiming that noodles are being surgically removed from the intestines of a person. The caption in the viral video states that Dr. Harish Shukla of Apollo Hospital made this video. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral claim is false.
A video is shared on Facebook by a user named Vnita Vnita Punjab. The video is shared with a caption that reads: ‘This video was made by Apollo Hospital’s doctor Harish Shukla during the operation. Our digestion system is not able to digest noodles. That’s why noodles were surgically removed from a patient. Protect your children from noodles. Please watch the video and share it for humanity’s sake.” This is not the first time such video has been shared. The video is viral across social media with different claims.
Vishvas News started its investigation by breaking down various elements of the viral post. We used InVid tool and performed reverse image search on the keyframes using Yandex search engine. This gave us a result which appears to be one of the oldest instances of the viral video.
The video was uploaded on August 24, 2015 by a channel of a Youtuber named Dr. Paresh Ruparel. The video was posted with a caption that said, “Multiple roundworms in the small intestine..surgical removal done..”
The same video was used with a different caption stating that roundworms were present in the small intestines which were surgically removed.
It was also claimed in the viral video that a doctor in Apollo Hospitals created the video. Vishvas News contacted the PRO of Apollo Hospitals. The PRO of Apollo hospital denied any connection of the video with Apollo Hospital.
The claim of the viral video stating that noodles are being surgically removed from the intestines of a person is fake.
Knowing the truth is your right. If you have a doubt on any news that could impact you, society or the nation, let us know. You can share your doubts and send you news for fact verification on our mail ID contact@vishvasnews.com or whatsapp us on 9205270923
- Claim Review : Noodles being surgically removed from intestines
- Claimed By : FB User: Vnita Vnita Punjab