SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Ginger is 10,000 times more effective than chemotherapy is a misleading claim
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-ginger-is-10000-times-more-effective-than-chemotherapy-is-a-misleading-claim/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Ginger is 10,000 times more effective than chemotherapy is a misleading claim
- Published: Sep 10, 2019 at 05:53 PM
A post is doing rounds on social media claiming that natural ginger is up to 10,000 times more effective than chemotherapy drugs at treating cancer. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral claim is misleading.
A post shared on Facebook by a user named Ugwu Chukwudi Richie claims that natural ginger is up to 10,000 times more effective than chemotherapy drugs at treating cancer.
“Since 6-shogaol has been reported as a potent anticancer agent against various cancer cells, we have investigated its inhibitory effect on breast cancer cells and cancer stem cell-like spheroids. Here we demonstrate that 6-shogaol shows anti-proliferative activity against breast cancer cells and spheroids and suppresses the size and colony forming ability of spheroids by altering the Notch signaling pathway.”
These studies suggest that there are certain properties of ginger that may help in cancer treatment. However, the claim that ginger is 10,000 times better than chemotherapy hasn’t been proven in these studies.
Although there are certain health benefits of ginger as stated in studies but the claim that ginger is 10,000 times more effective than chemotherapy is not true. The viral post is misleading.
- Claim Review : Ginger is up to 10,000 times more effective than chemotherapy
- Claimed By : FB User: Ugwu Chukwudi Richie
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.