SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: No, A Camel In An Image Can Not Help In Diagnosing Alzheimer’s﻿
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-no-a-camel-in-an-image-can-not-help-in-diagnosing-alzheimers/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: No, A Camel In An Image Can Not Help In Diagnosing Alzheimer’s
- Published: Oct 25, 2019 at 03:50 PM
An unusual image is getting viral on social media with the claim that finding a camel in the image will help in determining the risk of Alzheimer’s. Vishvas News investigated and found that the image is edited and the claim is a rumor.
A photo shared on Facebook by a user named Roger Taylor is accompanied by a caption that reads: “Dr’s say those who find the camel are unlikely to get Alzheimer’s”. The text in the photo reads: “The test of the head is to find a camel, it’s a test to see who can develop Alzheimer’s. Doctors say those who find the camel will stay far from getting Alzheimer’s”.
The original image does not have camel in it. The picture of camel has been inserted on the original image and the original image has been edited.
We can see that camel is inserted in the doctored picture. Whereas there is no camel in the original picture.
No camel in present in the original image
On the official website of Alzheimer’s Research UK, we searched articles on determining risks of Alzheimer’s by looking at an animal’s image, but no such study was mentioned.
According to US Department of Health & Human Sciences, Alzheimer’s disease is an irreversible, progressive brain disorder that slowly destroys memory and thinking skills and, eventually, the ability to carry out the simplest tasks.
According to Alzheimer’s Association, The most common early symptom of Alzheimer’s is difficulty remembering newly learned information because Alzheimer’s changes typically begin in the part of the brain that affects learning. As Alzheimer’s advances through the brain it leads to increasingly severe symptoms, including disorientation, mood and behavior changes; deepening confusion about events, time and place; unfounded suspicions about family, friends and professional caregivers; more serious memory loss and behavior changes; and difficulty speaking, swallowing and walking.
Nowhere has it been mentioned that spotting an animal in the image can help in diagnosing risk of Alzheimer’s disease.
The post claiming that acamel in an image can help in diagnosing risk of Alzheimer’s is fake.
- Claim Review : Dr's say those who find the camel are unlikely to get Alzheimers.
- Claimed By : FB User- Roger Taylor
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.