SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Viral post regarding contraceptive pills is misleading
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-viral-post-regarding-contraceptive-pills-is-misleading/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Viral post regarding contraceptive pills is misleading
- Published: Sep 2, 2019 at 04:52 PM
A post is getting viral on social media claiming that I-Pill and Unwanted 72 contain arsenic. The post further states that the arsenic in the contraceptive pills destroys the fertility system within 72 hours and that the contraceptive pills can cause cancer.
A post shared on Facebook claims that contraceptive pills contain arsenic which destroys the fertility system within 72 hours. It further states that contraceptive pills cause cancer. The post is shared by a Facebook page Girl’s Safety. It has 93 reactions, 18 comments, and 17 shares.
When we searched Levonorgestrel as a keyword on Google, on the official website of National Center for Biotechnology Medicine, US National Council of Medicine, we found that “Levonorgestrel, also known as the morning-after pill, is a first-line oral emergency contraceptive pill that has approval from the World Health Organization to prevent pregnancy. It is FDA approved to be used within 72 hours of unprotected sexual intercourse or when a presumed contraceptive failure has occurred.”
We searched about contraceptive medicines containing arsenic but did not find any related information.
We also searched on the official website of World Health Organization (WHO), there was no mention of arsenic in the description of contraceptive medicines.
We also spoke to Dr. Manish Singhal, who is an Oncologist at Indraprastha Apollo Hospital. He said: “Long exposures to contraceptive pills can be harmful. But, once in a while, it doesn’t cause problems. No, it doesn’t contain arsenic.”
Knowing the truth is your right. If you have a doubt on any news that could impact you, society or the nation, let us know. You can share your doubts and send you news for fact verification on our mail ID contact@vishvasnews.com or whatsapp us on 9205270923
- Claim Review : Contraceptive pills destroys fertility system, it contains arsenic, it can cause cancer
- Claimed By : FB Page: Girl's Safety