SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact check: The Doctor in the viral claim arrested in Kidney racket, not for giving fake covid positive report
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-the-doctor-in-the-viral-claim-arrested-in-kidney-racket-not-for-giving-fake-covid-positive-reports/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact check: The Doctor in the viral claim arrested in Kidney racket, not for giving fake covid positive report
The doctor was arrested for running a kidney racket. The claims shared on social media relating the incident to coronavirus is fake.
- Published: Sep 1, 2020 at 06:41 PM
New Delhi (Vishvas Team). A viral post with a newspaper clipping relates coronavirus with a kidney racket. It claims that a doctor has been arrested for killing 125 patients on the pretext of covid-19 for kidney trade.
Vishvas News received the claim on Fact Checking WhatsApp chatbot (+91 95992 99372). Vishvas News investigation revealed the claim to be fake. We found that a news report on kidney transplant racket is viral with false claims linking to coronavirus.
The claim is viral on major social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter and WhatsApp. Facebook user named Ankur Munakhya Kandera is one among the many users who shared the post is. It claims, “Dr. Devendra Sharma, who has killed around 125 people by taking their kidney has been arrested. This doctor used to tell a healthy person to be a corona patient…”
The things written in the post are written here as soon as possible. The archived version of this post can be accessed here.
During the search we also received a news report of Dainik Jagran. This report describes this incident in detail here .
This arrested doctor is a resident of Aligarh. We contacted Santosh Kumar Sharma, Chief Reporter of Dainik Jagran Aligarh to verify the information. He dismissed this claim and confirmed that the viral post is completely false. He said that the doctor was not arrested in giving fake coronavirus positive reports to healthy patients. “The doctor is convicted in kidney racket and other murder cases. He escaped after leaving parole. He was later found and arrested,” Sharma said.
Conclusion: The doctor was arrested for running a kidney racket. The claims shared on social media relating the incident to coronavirus is fake.
- Claim Review : Doctor arrested for giving fake covid positive report for healthy patient
- Claimed By : Ankur Munakhya Kandera
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.