SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: The man in this video isn’t Dr. Sushil Razdan; Covid 19 can not be prevented by snorting dry ginger powder
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-the-man-in-this-video-isnt-dr-sushil-razdan-covid-19-can-not-be-prevented-by-snorting-dry-ginger-powder/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: The man in this video isn’t Dr. Sushil Razdan; Covid 19 can not be prevented by snorting dry ginger powder
- Published: Jan 14, 2022 at 11:34 AM
New Delhi (Vishvas News). In a viral video, a man can be seen claiming that snorting dry ginger powder can prevent you from Covid 19. The post is also claiming that the man in the video is Dr Sushil Razdan. Vishvas News investigated the post and found it to be false. The person seen in the video is not Dr. Sushil Razdan and the method of treatment of corona virus described in the video is wrong. According to medical experts, snorting dry ginger powder can be harmful.
Social media user ‘Sofi Zahoor‘ shared this video and referred to it as a way to prevent the new variant Omicron of corona virus. The user also claimed that the man in the video is Dr. Sushil Razdan.
Several other users on social media have also shared this video with similar claims.
The viral post is claiming that the man in the video is Dr Sushil Razdan.
Another Facebook user ‘Badal Jana‘ has also shared the audio interview of Dr. Razdan on his timeline. In this interview, Dr. Razdan said, ‘I have nothing to do with the person seen in the video.’
Dr. Sushil Razdan is a Neurologist working in Medanta Medicity Hospital, Gurugram. In the collage below, it can be clearly seen that the person seen in the video is not Dr. Razdan.
It is clear from our investigation so far that the man in the video isn’t famous neurologist Dr. Sushil Razdan. The person seen in the video is someone else.
After this, we investigated the claim made in the video regarding snorting dry ginger powder to prevent Covid 19.. Vishvas News contacted Dr. Gautam Sharma, who works in RML, regarding this. He said, “Omicron, a new variant of the coronavirus, is spreading rapidly and if a person has symptoms of its infection, then they should immediately get tested and contact a doctor. Patients should follow the treatment procedure as prescribed by the doctors and treating themselves by watching such viral and misleading videos can be dangerous for their health. The method of treatment described in the video is completely wrong. The vaccine is the way of protection against the virus and those who have not taken both doses should try to get it as soon as possible.”
Conclusion: Vishvas News investigated the post and found it to be false. The person seen in the video is not Dr. Sushil Razdan and the method of treatment of coronavirus described in the video is wrong. According to medical experts, snorting dry ginger powder can be harmful.
- Claim Review : Dr Sushil Razdan showing a way to avoid Omicron .......
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.