SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: No, the new-born baby is not 105 years old, she is suffering from a skin disease ﻿
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-no-the-new-born-baby-is-not-105-years-old-she-is-suffering-from-a-skin-disease/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: No, the new-born baby is not 105 years old, she is suffering from a skin disease
- Published: Sep 23, 2019 at 01:02 PM
- Updated: Aug 31, 2020 at 12:11 AM
A photo of a baby is circulating across social media
purporting to show a miracle that happened in India where a 105 years old baby
is born. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral claim is false.
A photo shared on Facebook by a user named ‘Hakeem Abdul Ghani Ghani claims that: “A 105 years old baby is born in India”
The news dates back to 2015 as per the report published at Jagran.com which states: A two week old baby abandoned by parents after being born by a rare wrinkly skin condition. As per the report, the baby was suffering from a disease named Intra-Uterine Growth Retardation (IUGR) and was being treated at Mumbai’s Wadia Hospital.
When we further searched news reports using the keywords “Newborn baby abandoned by parents due to wrinkly skin” and found multiple media reports on the same.
Here’s a report by Huffington post:
Here’s another report by metro.co.uk, covering the same story:
Vishvas News spoke to Dr. Virendra Mittal, Paediatrician, Metro Mas Hospital, Jaipur. He said, “this claim is false. The baby is not 105 years old. Rather, he is suffering from a skin disease.”
The claim stating that the baby shown in the viral photo is 105 years old is false. In fact, the baby was born in the year 2015 with a skin disease due to which her skin was wrinkly.
- Claim Review : The new-born baby is 105 years old
- Claimed By : FB User-Hakeem Abdul Ghani Ghani
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.