SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Post claiming garlic is remedy for ear infections, headache is misleading; experts dismissed the viral claim
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-post-claiming-garlic-is-remedy-for-ear-infections-headache-is-misleading-experts-dismissed-the-viral-claim/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Post claiming garlic is remedy for ear infections, headache is misleading; experts dismissed the viral claim
Viral post claiming that putting a garlic clove in your ear can reduce pain, infection and headache is misleading.
- Published: Jan 31, 2022 at 06:00 PM
- Updated: Jan 31, 2022 at 06:45 PM
New Delhi (Vishvas News): Netizens on Facebook are sharing a post which claims that treating an ear problem is as simple as putting garlic in your ear. “Did you know? Garlic helps remove pain in ears, ear infections, and headaches quickly and effectively. Simply, put a cleaned garlic clove in your ear – it fits perfectly in ear, as an earplug (sic) until you feel relief,” reads the text of a Facebook post. Vishvas News investigated the post and found it to be misleading. We spoke to renowned specialists who dismissed the viral claim.
A social media post reads: “Did you know? Garlic helps remove pain in ears, ear infections, and headaches quickly and effectively. Simply, put a cleaned garlic clove in your ear – it fits perfectly in ear, as an earplugs (sic) until you feel relief.“
The archived version of the post can be checked here.
Dr. Rahul Sharma, MS(ENT), Senior Consultant ENT, Maharaja Agrasen Hospital said: “As an ENT Specialist and a practitioner of modern medicine( Allopathy), I don’t recommend such treatments. It can worsen an already existing ear problem or may lead to infection in the ear. A small piece of garlic may fall inside, get lodged in the ear canal, and act as a foreign body leading to more complications.”
Dr. Vimal N, Scientist, Sri Sri Institute for Advanced Research, Bangalore explained while speaking to Vishvas News: “I won’t really recommend putting any solid object inside the ear canal. The clove of garlic might be small enough to get stuck inside the canal. There is no evidence supporting this claim. Ayurveda and Siddha also do not recommend this practice.”
The post is shared on Facebook by a user named Just call me Betty. The social scanning of the page revealed that the page is a kitchenware promotional page.
Conclusion: Viral post claiming that putting a garlic clove in your ear can reduce pain, infection and headache is misleading.
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.