SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Remdesivir injection is not available on Pradhan Mantri Jan Aushadhi Kendras, viral post is misleading
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-remdesivir-injection-is-not-available-on-pradhan-mantri-jan-aushadhi-kendras-viral-post-is-misleading/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Remdesivir injection is not available on Pradhan Mantri Jan Aushadhi Kendras, viral post is misleading
Remdesivir injection is not available on any of the Pradhan Mantri Jan Aushadhi Kendras. Also only one out of seven manufacturers of Remdesivir has reduced the price to Rs 899, however, the other six manufacturers have also slashed the price.
- Published: Apr 19, 2021 at 05:15 PM
- Updated: Apr 22, 2021 at 05:08 PM
New Delhi (Vishvas News): A viral post on social media claims that Remdesivir injection which is being used to treat corona patients is available on Pradhan Mantri Jan Aushadhi Kendras. Also, the viral post claims that one can get Remdesivir at just Rs 899 as against Rs 4000 charged by medical shops. Documents required for this are- 1) Patient’s Aadhar card 2) Covid positive report 3) ORIGINAL Doctors prescription 4) aadhar card of the person taking medicine. Vishvas News investigated the post and found it to be misleading.
We found that Remdesivir is not available at any of the Pradhan Mantri Jan Aushadhi Kendras. Also, this injection is manufactured by seven pharmaceutical companies in India. As per the latest update after the government intervention, all the companies have reduced the price of Remdesivir including Zydus Cadila who has cut the price to Rs 899.
A post shared on Facebook reads: “Hello Friends
Anyone requiring injection Remdesivir can get @ Rs 899/- as against Rs.4000/- charged by medical shops.
You can purchase it directly from Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Jan Aushadhi Kendra
Pradhan mantri Jan Aushadhi Kendra is there in almost every city in India.
4) aadhar card of person taking medicine
Please share in all your groups to help others.”
The archived version of the post can be checked here.
We contacted the national helpline number of Pradhan Mantri Bharatiya Janaushadhi Kendra and had a word with Deepak. He told us that Remdesivir is not available at any of the kendras and the claim in the viral post is not true.
We found many media reports which have included the statement of NITI Aayog member (Health) Dr. VK Paul. He has clarified in these reports published on April 13, that “Remdesivir is to be used only in those who require hospitalisation and are on oxygen support. That is the precondition. There is no question of its use in the home setting and for mild cases, and it is not to be procured from chemist shops.”
The viral post also talks about the price of Remdesivr that which is available at Rs 899. This injection is manufactured by seven pharmaceutical companies in India. Among them, as per the media reports, Zydus Cadila has reduced the price and made it affordable at Rs 899 for a 100mg lyophilized injection. Also, Dr. Reddy’s has slashed the MRP by 50 percent. As per the latest update, after the government intervention, all seven companies have cut the prices.
We scanned the profile of the Facebook user who shared the viral post. We found that the user Shahin Patel hails from Mumbai, Maharashtra.
Conclusion: Remdesivir injection is not available on any of the Pradhan Mantri Jan Aushadhi Kendras. Also only one out of seven manufacturers of Remdesivir has reduced the price to Rs 899, however, the other six manufacturers have also slashed the price.
- Claim Review : Anyone requiring injection Remdesivir can get @ Rs 899/- as against Rs.4000/- charged by medical shops. You can purchase it directly from Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Jan Aushadhi Kend
- Claimed By : FB user: Shahin Patel
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.