SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Post claiming that Nestle accepts adding juice of beef in KitKat is fake
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-post-claiming-that-nestle-accepts-adding-juice-of-beef-in-kitkat-is-fake/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Post claiming that Nestle accepts adding juice of beef in KitKat is fake
- Published: Nov 7, 2019 at 07:06 PM
A post doing rounds on social media claims that Nestle adds the juice of beef in their Kitkat chocolate. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral post is false.
A viral post shared on Facebook reads: Shocking Truth….Nestle Company accepts that they add juice extracted from Beef in KitKat Chocolate!!
We found a report on the website of BBC that, back in 2013, Nestle withdrew two beef pasta meals from shelves in Italy and Spain. It was during a scandal involving the mixing of Horsemeat when Nestle identified the problem with a supplier from Germany.
Using Twitter Advanced Search, we found a tweet in which Twitter responded that all variants of KITKAT in India are 100% veg. All ingredients are listed on the pack for easy reference.
As per Nestle Annual Report 2015, “With KitKat, Nestlé has a strong global player driving performance in both emerging and developed markets. KitKat will become the first global confectionery brand sourced from 100 percent certified sustainable cocoa, starting early in 2016. The brand already uses sustainably sourced cocoa, accredited by independent third-party bodies, in products sold in certain markets, but this new announcement extends the practice worldwide, including the United States.”
The post claiming that Nestle accepts adding juice of beef in KitKat is fake.
- Claim Review : Nestle accepts adding juice of beef in KitKat
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.