SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: The Claim That Drinking Fenugreek, Clove, Cardamom, And Cinnamon Mixed In Water Cures Last-Stage Cancer Is False
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-the-claim-that-drinking-fenugreek-clove-cardamom-and-cinnamon-mixed-in-water-cures-last-stage-cancer-is-false/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: The Claim That Drinking Fenugreek, Clove, Cardamom, And Cinnamon Mixed In Water Cures Last-Stage Cancer Is False
The claim that boiling fenugreek, cloves, cardamom and cinnamon in water and drinking it in the morning and evening can cure late-stage cancer is false. According to experts, there is no scientific evidence to support this claim.
- Published: Feb 12, 2025 at 10:28 AM
New Delhi (Vishvas News). A video claiming to offer a cure for last-stage cancer is going viral on social media. In the video, a person claims that boiling fenugreek, cloves, cardamom, and cinnamon in water and drinking it can cure last-stage cancer.
Vishvas News investigated the claim by consulting experts, who confirmed that there is no scientific evidence to support this. The claim that this mixture can cure last-stage cancer is false.
Instagram user ‘powerofislamindia’ posted the video on February 5, 2025 (archive link), claiming that last-stage cancer will be cured by boiling fenugreek, cloves, cardamom, and cinnamon in water and drinking it in the morning and evening. This post has been liked by more than six lakh people.
To verify the authenticity of the viral claim, we conducted a Google search with relevant keywords, but did not find any report or study supporting it. According to a report published on the US government’s National Library of Medicine website states that, many spices, such as turmeric, black cumin, ginger, garlic, saffron, and black pepper have potential cancer-preventive properties. However, there is no mention of the viral claim in the report.
The report quoted Dr Meenu Walia, Oncologist, Max Healthcare, states, “Cinnamon extract may have anti-cancer effects. It may help reduce tumour growth and spread.” However, there is no report corroborating the viral claim.
We also contacted Dr Rohit Kapoor, Cancer Specialist at Max Vaishali, regarding this, who dismissed the viral claim as false. He shared a study discussing the potential role of certain spices, such as turmeric, ginger, garlic, black cumin, black pepper, galangal, coriander, wasabi, oregano, fenugreek, thyme, and cloves in gastric cancer prevention. However, he emphasied that these spices cannot be used as an alternative to conventional chemotherapy for cancer treatment.
We also contacted Ayurvedic experts to verify the claim. Dr Mayank Shinde of Dr. Shinde Ayurvedic Cancer Care Clinic stated that drinking a mixture of boiled fenugreek, cinnamon, cardamom, and cloves cannot cure last-stage cancer, calling the claim misleading.
Similarly, Cancer Consultant and MD (Ayurveda) Dr Manish Singh Tomar says that there is no scientific evidence to support this claim. Some spices may have cancer-preventive properties, but there is no evidence supporting this. Ongoing research is exploring the potential benefits of spices in curing cancer, but without any scientific evidence, such claims cannot be validated.
We scanned the profile of the Instagram user who made the false claim and found the user has posted several videos from his account claiming to cure several diseases.
Conclusion: The claim that boiling fenugreek, cloves, cardamom and cinnamon in water and drinking it in the morning and evening can cure late-stage cancer is false. According to experts, there is no scientific evidence to support this claim.
- Claim Review : Drinking Fenugreek, Clove, Cardamom, And Cinnamon Mixed In Water Cures Last-Stage Cancer
- Claimed By : Instagram user ‘powerofislamindia’
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.