SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Post claiming that a smoothie can cure diabetes is misleading
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-post-claiming-that-a-smoothie-can-cure-diabetes-is-misleading/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Post claiming that a smoothie can cure diabetes is misleading
- Published: Dec 9, 2019 at 05:27 PM
- Updated: Dec 28, 2019 at 02:00 PM
A video getting viral on Facebook claims that diabetes can be cured by having a smoothie made of the ingredients shown in the video, which are
2 bananas, 5 kiwis, 2 apples with skin, 1 coat of cabbage, and 1/2 liter of water. It further claims that this smoothie can also help in losing weight. Vishvas News investigated and found that the claim in the viral video is misleading.
A video shared on Facebook by a page named DEMIC shows a smoothie made of 2 bananas, 5 kiwis, 2 apples with skin, 1 coat of cabbage, and 1/2 liter of water. In the video, it has been claimed that consuming this smoothie will cure diabetes and will also help in losing weight. The video has around 5.1 million views, 11000 comments, and 31000 shares.
We also contacted Dr. Piyush Juneja, Ayurveda Doctor, Ayurvedic Clinic. He said: “Diabetes is not cured by consuming a smoothie. However, it can be managed and controlled using certain home remedies and lifestyle changes.”
We scanned the profile of the page ‘DEMIC’ from where the video was shared. The page has 11 Million followers. It was founded in the year 2000.
The video shared on Facebook claiming that the smoothie made of 2 bananas, 5 kiwis, 2 apples with skin, 1 coat of cabbage, and 1/2 liter of water can cure diabetes and helps in losing weight is misleading.
- Claim Review : A smoothie made of certain ingredients can cure diabetes and reduce weight
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.