SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: World Cancer Day 2020: Debunking most-shared cancer myths and misconceptions
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/world-cancer-day-2020-debunking-most-shared-cancer-myths-and-misconceptions/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

World Cancer Day 2020: Debunking most-shared cancer myths and misconceptions
Vishvas News debunked some of the cancer-related myths and misconceptions: Post claiming that Wild Aubergine can cure cancer is fake, Post claiming deodorants cause breast cancer is fake, etc.
- Published: Feb 4, 2020 at 03:54 PM
1. Fact Check: Post claiming that Wild Aubergine can cure cancer is fake
A post shared on Facebook starts with: GOOD NEWS FOR CANCER PATIENTS, THE CURE IS HERE. Such headlines that claim to cure deadly diseases attract hundreds of readers who click on it and sometimes fall prey to it. The viral post on social media claims that wild aubergine can cure diseases such as breast cancer, prostate cancer, stomach cancer, liver cancer, kidney cancer, and asthma. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral post is fake.
2. Fact Check: Post claiming deodorants cause breast cancer is fake
A post is getting viral on social media claiming that there is a possible connection between deodorants and breast cancer. The caption in the post claims that your deodorant can cause breast cancer. Post claiming deodorants cause breast cancer is fake. American Cancer Society and the cancer specialist have denied such claim.
3. Fact Check: Post claiming cancer is not a disease but fungus is misleading
A post is getting viral on social media with cancer-related claims. It claims that cancer is a fungus called myotoxin, not a disease. It further claims that chemotherapy is a mustard gas poison. It also states that alkaline foods keep you from getting cancer and keep your body’s pH level alkaline and acid in your body is what keeps your cancer fungus growing. Vishvas News investigated and found that all the messages in the viral post are misleading.
4. Fact Check: Post claiming drinking cold water after meals can cause cancer is fake
A post doing rounds on social media claims that drinking cold water after a meal can cause cancer. It further claims that if you consume cold water after meal, it will solidify oily content in the food and this solidified content will line the intestines and ultimately lead to cancer. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral post is false.
5. Fact Check: Post claiming a home-made mixture can cure cancer in 3 days is false
A viral video on social media claims that last stage cancer can be cured in 72 hours by consuming a home-made mixture made of walnut, sprouted grains, honey, garlic, and lemon. As per the video, the mixture needs to be stored in the fridge and eaten multiple times a day. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral claim is false.
6. Fact Check: Post claiming baking soda can cure cancer is fake
A viral post on social media claims that baking soda can cure cancer. The claim is attributed to Dr. Simonchini, an oncologist in Rome. As suggested in the post, Dr. Simonchini observed that a tumour got flushed with baking soda and was disappeared in a few days. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral post is fake.
7. Fact Check: Can consuming cold water, cucumber during menstruation cause cancer, infertility? No
A post shared on social media suggests certain activities women should avoid during menstruation. A woman should avoid such activities as it increases the risk of ‘sterility’ and ‘uterus cancer’ as per the viral post. The source of the claim is given as the Indonesian Cancer Extension Institute. The post is also accompanied by disturbing images of a severely swollen belly. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral post is misleading.
Conclusion: Vishvas News debunked some of the cancer-related myths and misconceptions: Post claiming that Wild Aubergine can cure cancer is fake, Post claiming deodorants cause breast cancer is fake, etc.
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.