SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Post claiming that burning camphor and inhaling the smell combats air pollution is misleading
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-post-claiming-that-burning-camphor-and-inhaling-the-smell-combats-air-pollution-is-misleading/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Post claiming that burning camphor and inhaling the smell combats air pollution is misleading
- Published: Dec 6, 2019 at 03:27 PM
A viral post on social media claims that lighting a wee bit of camphor and inhaling its aroma helps as it can counter air pollution. The post also recommends wearing a beaded necklace of cotton around the neck. Vishvas News investigated and found that camphor comes in natural and synthetic forms. Nowadays mostly synthetic camphor is used. Burning of artificial camphor causes harm and produces more smoke. Therefore, the claim that burning camphor and inhaling its smell can combat air pollution is misleading.
The post viral on Twitter shared by a used named Sadhavi Khosla reads: “Use more and more camphor (kapur) at home… lighting a wee bit of camphor and inhaling its lingering aroma helps. You may make a beads (mala) of camphor with cotton and wear it around your neck to counter #AirPollution it helps a lot.”
To verify the viral claim, Vishvas News spoke to Dr. Loveleen Mangla who is a Pulmonologist in Metro Cancer Hospital. He said: “There is no scientific evidence that supports that burning camphor and inhaling it can counter air pollution. In fact, burning camphor produces more smoke.”
We also reached out to Dr. Vimal N., who is an ayurveda doctor. He said: “Burning of camphor and inhaling it to counter air pollution doesn’t help. However, natural camphor does have certain health benefits but these days synthetic camphor is used mostly which is not good to use.”
We further searched and found some reports that supported the fact that the burning of camphor can cause health issues. Here are some examples:
On April 7, 2016, an article published on The Hindu was headlined: Ban on camphor use in temples to be strictly enforced
Vishvas News investigated and found that camphor comes in natural and synthetic forms. Nowadays mostly synthetic camphor is used. Burning of artificial camphor causes harm and produces more smoke. Therefore, the claim that burning camphor and inhaling its smell can combat air pollution is misleading.
- Claim Review : Burning camphor and inhaling the smell combats air pollution
- Claimed By : Twitter User: Sadhavi Khosla
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.