SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: These are not photos of a man with an artificial heart
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-these-are-not-photos-of-a-man-with-an-artificial-heart/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: These are not photos of a man with an artificial heart
- Published: May 21, 2019 at 01:36 PM
- Updated: Aug 30, 2020 at 07:57 PM
A viral post on Facebook shows a photo collage which purports to show a man with an artificial heart. The viral photo is accompanied by a caption stating that the man’s name is Jubair Shaikh. An occultist robbed his house due to which he got a heart attack and doctors placed an artificial heart. The hospital bill costs Rs 19 lakhs which he cannot afford. Facebook has decided to help the man by transferring Rs 10 per share. The viral post has been shared by a Facebook user Mohd Azeem. The post has 484 reactions, 386 comments, and 213 shares.
We performed a reverse image search on Yandex and found 2 Instagram posts shared by a page of Los Angeles-based makeup artist Jamie Kelman. Here are the screenshots from the Instagram post:
The photo was shared on February 22, 2018. The caption on the Instagram post says, in part: “IRON MAN (2008) – Marvel Studios is celebrating its 10th anniversary – happy 10 years of massive success, Marvel! I was the Key Makeup Artist on their very first and imo still best Marvel Entertainment MCU movie, but I know I’m biased”.
It also says: “Pictured here: silicone appliance makeup on the very brilliant actor, Robert Downey Jr that I sculpted, molded & ran at my home fx lab, KELMAN STUDIO.”
The second photo was shared on March 12, 2018. The caption with the photo states that “This prosthetic makeup was built by Stan Winston Studio, supervised by Shane Mahan, and applied by 3 of us— my boss, makeup department head Deborah La Mia Denaver, and by Richie Alonzo, and by me.” It adds: “These pix are from the VERY first day of filming the first IRON MAN, they are dated March 12, 2007.”
We further investigated and searched the official website of the Los Angeles-based makeup artist Jamie Kelman. We landed to the same image:
The role of Tony Stark/IRON MAN was played by the actor Robert Downey Jr. in the 2008 Marvel Studios film Iron Man. Here is the IMDB page for the 2008 film Iron Man, which lists Robert Downey Jr. in the lead role of “Tony Stark / Iron Man” and Jamie Kelman as “key makeup artist”.
Also, there is no evidence from the post that proves that Facebook is raising money for the purported heart transplant patient as mentioned in the viral Facebook post.
Knowing the truth is your right. If you have a doubt on any news that could impact you, society or the nation, let us know. You can share your doubts and send you news for fact verification on our mail ID contact@vishvasnews.com or whatsapp us on 9205270923
- Claim Review : man shown in the photo suffered from a heart attack and doctors placed an artificial heart