SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Flu shots make people contagious is a misleading post
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-flu-shots-make-people-contagious-is-a-misleading-post/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Flu shots make people contagious is a misleading post
- Published: Nov 7, 2019 at 10:47 AM
A post circulating online warns people that getting vaccinated will cause them to be contagious for some weeks. The viral post states that people who get flu shots should stay at home for a minimum of 2 weeks as they have an active live walking virus. Vishvas News investigated and found that the claim is false.
A post shared on Facebook by a user named Jodi Graesser reads: “Folks who get flu shots please have some courtesy and stay home for minimal of 2 weeks while you are an active live walking virus. Also don’t hug others and give kisses and please immediately tell others you were vaccinated so they don’t come close you.”
We further investigated and found an article on the official website of Harvard Medical School. The website calls the claim a myth. It states that the flu shot can’t transmit infection. It takes a week or two to get protection from the vaccine.
Vishvas News spoke to Dr. Sanchayan Roy, who is a General Physician. He said: “This is not true. Vaccines help develop immunity. Vaccines contain a version of the virus or bacteria that has been weakened so that it does not cause serious disease in people with healthy immune systems. Infact, it gives immunity to the body by producing antibodies. The claim which states that people who get vaccinated will be contagious for some weeks is fake.”
According to the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, vaccines help develop immunity by imitating an infection. This type of infection, however, almost never causes illness, but it does cause the immune system to produce T-lymphocytes and antibodies. Sometimes, after getting a vaccine, the imitation infection can cause minor symptoms, such as fever. Such minor symptoms are normal and should be expected as the body builds immunity. Vaccines help develop immunity by imitating an infection.
Nowhere has it been mentioned that the person who has got the vaccine can transfer the virus to someone he hugs or kisses or comes in contact.
- Claim Review : Flu shots make people contagious
- Claimed By : FB User: Jodi Graesser
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.