SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: No, a drowned person cannot revive if covered in salt
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-no-a-drowned-person-cannot-revive-if-covered-in-salt/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: No, a drowned person cannot revive if covered in salt
- Published: Aug 24, 2019 at 03:55 PM
A photo is getting viral on social media showing a boy covered in a heap of salt. The post claims that a drowned person who is recovered within 3-4 hours can be revived if he is covered in salt. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral post is fake.
A photo is doing rounds on social media showing a child covered in a heap of salt. The post is shared with a claim that reads: “If someone dies due to drowning and the body is found within 3-4 hours, remove the clothes of the deceased and cover the body in 1.5 quintal of salt. The salt will slowly drain the water out of the body. Once the person gets conscious, take him to a doctor. If you have taken someone who has drowned to a hospital and the doctors have declared him dead, proceed with the salt treatment. By God’s grace, everything will be all right. Do not hurry to cremate once the doctor has declared the patient dead.” The post has been shared on Facebook by a page named Panchtatva.org.
We searched online for news reports if any person survived using the salt treatment after drowning. We found reports mentioning families of people who fell for such superstitious beliefs but couldn’t revive the deceased.
On August 21, 2018, a news website reported an incident in which a family tried out this salt treatment to revive the deceased but nothing positive happened.
The post claiming that drowned person who is recovered within 3-4 hours can be revived if covered in salt is fake.
Knowing the truth is your right. If you have a doubt on any news that could impact you, society or the nation, let us know. You can share your doubts and send you news for fact verification on our mail ID contact@vishvasnews.com or whatsapp us on 9205270923
- Claim Review : a drowned person can revive a drowned person cannot revive if covered in saltif covered in salt
- Claimed By : FB Page: Panchtatva.org