SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Pepaero cures dengue in 48 hours is a misleading claim
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-pepaero-cures-dengue-in-48-hours-is-a-misleading-claim/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Pepaero cures dengue in 48 hours is a misleading claim
- Published: Sep 6, 2019 at 07:10 PM
A message is doing rounds on social media claiming that a medicine named Pepaero cures dengue in 48 hours. It is further claimed that the medicine is available free of cost at Aerochem Neutron. Vishvas News investigated and found that the medicine named Pepaero cannot cure dengue, it only helps in increasing the platelets count. The viral post is misleading.
The viral message on social media claims that Pepaero medicine cures dengue in 48 hours. It further claims that Pepaero medicine is available free of cost at Aerochem Neutron. The message has been around on social media since years and has resurfaced again.
Vishvas News started its investigation by breaking down various elements of the viral claim.
He further said that the medicine shown in the viral image does not cure dengue. It helps in increasing the low platelet count.
The viral message claims that the medicine is provided free of cost by their company. Upon asking, the owner agrees that the medicine is provided free of cost by their company.
He further explained that there is a process in which an email is sent to people stating the dose of the medicine and when it should be taken to people who contact them for information.
Dr. Virendra Mittal of Metro Mas Hospital, Jaipur stated that: “The medicine might help a little but it is not possible that dengue can be cured by this medicine within 48 hours.”
- Claim Review : Pepaero cures dengue in 48 hours
- Claimed By : FB User: Rajdeep Saha
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.