SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Quick Fact Check: Misleading post claiming black garlic can cure cancer resurfaces
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/quick-fact-check-misleading-post-claiming-black-garlic-can-cure-cancer-resurfaces/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Quick Fact Check: Misleading post claiming black garlic can cure cancer resurfaces
Post claiming black garlic can cure 14 types of cancer is misleading.
- Published: Nov 20, 2020 at 11:08 AM
- Updated: Nov 20, 2020 at 11:42 AM
New Delhi (Vishvas News): A post circulating online claims that Black Garlic and sprouted garlic can cure 14 types of cancer as it has twice the antioxidant levels of white garlic. Vishvas News had debunked the claim earlier also and found it to be a misleading post.
Vishvas News got a fact-checking request for this post on its Whatsapp Chatbot (9599299372) also.
The post shared on a Facebook page named “Cancer Cures From Heaven” reads: “Black Garlic has twice the antioxidant levels of white garlic, it’s toxic to 14 types of cancer and has powerful healing benefits.”
The archived version of the post can be read here.
We started our investigation by searching for the viral claim on the internet. we found a report published by Thailand’s Mahidol University which says that Black Garlic is formed through fermentation by storing it at a temperature between 60 to 90 degree Celsius and by controlling the humidity to 80 to 90 percent. This process is done for at least one month or till the garlic turns black.
Thailand’s National Cance Institute has also clarified the claim to be fake. As per the report of the institute, eating too much of the quantity can have an adverse effect on health.
We also found a report by the American Institute of Cancer Research on its official website. This report states that some of the compounds in garlic do offer anti-cancer activity but it lacks human study.
Conclusion: Post claiming black garlic can cure 14 types of cancer is misleading.
- Claim Review : Black Garlic can cure 14 types of cancer
- Claimed By : FB page: Cancer Cures From Heaven
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.