SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: No, Dettol didn’t test the 2019 Novel Coronavirus Strains, misleading post getting viral
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-no-dettol-didnt-test-the-2019-novel-coronavirus-strains-misleading-post-getting-viral/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: No, Dettol didn’t test the 2019 Novel Coronavirus Strains, misleading post getting viral
- Published: Feb 7, 2020 at 06:21 PM
- Updated: Apr 24, 2020 at 07:53 PM
The viral post on social media shows the photo of a label of a Dettol product. The circled text shows the different microbes Dettol is able to kill, which includes the name of Coronavirus as well. The post caption states: “This kills coronavirus how did they know about it in 2019??”
The viral post questions how the term “coronavirus” was printed on the label of a Dettol product description in 2019 whereas the novel coronavirus was reported much later.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), Coronaviruses (CoV) are a large family of viruses that cause illness ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS-CoV) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS-CoV). A novel coronavirus (nCoV) is a new strain that has not been previously identified in humans.
As per Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Human coronaviruses were first identified in the mid-1960s. The seven coronaviruses that can infect people are:
MERS-CoV (the beta coronavirus that causes Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, or MERS)
SARS-CoV (the beta coronavirus that causes severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS)
The 2019 novel coronavirus is a new strain in the coronavirus family.
We further investigated and searched whether Dettol can kill the Coronavirus (2019-nCoV). On the website of Dettol, we found that: Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) is a new strain of coronavirus never seen before in humans so is not yet available for testing with our products. We continue to work with our partners to ensure that we have the latest understanding of the virus and will be testing our product range once health authorities make the strain available.
Disclaimer: The #CoronavirusFacts database records fact-checks published since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak. The pandemic and its consequences are constantly evolving and data that was accurate weeks or even days ago might have changed. Remember to check the date when the fact-check you are reading was published before sharing it.
Conclusion: The label of Dettol mentioning that it kills coronavirus is not the recent strain of coronavirus. They have not tested its products for the recent noval coronavirus. Misleading post is getting viral.
- Claim Review : Dettol kills coronavirus
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.