SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Post claiming mother killed children by mixing cough syrup with milk is fake
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-post-claiming-mother-killed-children-by-mixing-cough-syrup-with-milk-is-fake/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Post claiming mother killed children by mixing cough syrup with milk is fake
- Published: Jul 12, 2019 at 04:51 PM
A post is doing rounds on social media that reads: A mother killed her 4 children, accidentally. The children refused to drink cough syrup. So she mixed the syrup in milk. The children went to sleep after drinking the milk and never got up. After examining the clinical trials, all 4 of them were found dead in the bed, The mixture of cough syrup and milk proved to be poisonous. The mother said that she killed the children with her own hand, she is psychologically disturbed. Avoid drinking medicine in the milk. Not only cough syrup, Do not drink any chemical additives in milk. It will become poisonous.
As per the viral claim, a mother has killed her children by feeding them cough syrup with milk. We searched evidences supporting the claim but there were no reports about the alleged incident where a mother accidentally killed her four children after feeding them cough syrup with milk.
Speaking to Vishvas News, Dr. Virendra Mittal, Paediatrician in Metro Mas Hospital, Jaipur said that the combination of milk and cough syrup does not turn poisonous. It may cause some cough-related discomfort but it cannot take lives of people consuming it as claimed in the post. There are no credible reports of any such danger.
As per the study on drug interaction with milk, milk affects the absorption and excretion of drugs and are classified as moderate in severity. It further suggested that medicines and milk are taken at different times. Also, having knowledge about medicines and which foods affect its therapeutic action is of utmost importance. Although it is recommended that drug and milk should be taken at different times but nowhere has it been mentioned that both of them react to form poison.
It’s important to be up front and honest with your doctor about the foods you are eating and what medications you are taking so potential interactions can be discussed and hopefully avoided.
Post claiming mother killed children by mixing cough syrup with milk is fake. It is advisable to consult a doctor before taking up any medication with food.
Knowing the truth is your right. If you have a doubt on any news that could impact you, society or the nation, let us know. You can share your doubts and send you news for fact verification on our mail ID contact@vishvasnews.com or whatsapp us on 9205270923
- Claim Review : mother killed children by mixing cough syrup with milk