SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: No, Face Masks Alone Cannot Help In Preventing COVID-19, Viral Post Is Missing Crucial Context
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-no-face-masks-alone-cannot-help-in-preventing-covid-19-viral-post-is-missing-crucial-context/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: No, Face Masks Alone Cannot Help In Preventing COVID-19, Viral Post Is Missing Crucial Context
- Published: Dec 14, 2020 at 08:01 PM
New Delhi (Vishvas News): A post going viral on social media questions why people should get away from hospitals and nursing homes if masks work. And if masks don’t work, why don’t we get off of our children. Vishvas News investigated and found that the claim is missing some context. In order to prevent coronavirus masks are recommended along with social distancing and proper hand hygiene.
A claim shared on Facebook reads: “If masks work, then let family back into hospitals and nursing homes to be with their loved ones. If they don’t work, get them off our children. Someone is lying…” The archived version of the post can be checked here.
A mask is NOT a substitute for social distancing. masks should still be worn in addition to staying at least 6 feet apart, CDC suggests.
The bottom line is that even though a mask helps to reduce the spread of the virus, but it should be coupled with proper handwashing and social distancing as well.”
The post is shared on Facebook by a user named Penny Wiens-Normandeau. We scanned the profile of the user and found that the user is based out of Princeton.
No, face masks alone cannot help in preventing COVID-19, it should be coupled with proper handwashing and social distancing. The viral post is missing some crucial context.
Disclaimer: The #CoronavirusFacts database records fact-checks published since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak. The pandemic and its consequences are constantly evolving and data that was accurate weeks or even days ago might have changed. Remember to check the date when the fact-check you are reading was published before sharing it.
- Claim Review : If masks work, then let family back into hospitals and nursing homes to be with their loved ones. If they don’t work, get them off our children. Someone is lying…
- Claimed By : FB user: https://www.facebook.com/penny.wiens.9
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.