SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Post claiming sprouted wheat can cure diabetes and prevent heart attack is misleading
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-post-claiming-sprouted-wheat-can-cure-diabetes-and-prevent-heart-attack-is-misleading/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Post claiming sprouted wheat can cure diabetes and prevent heart attack is misleading
- Published: Sep 23, 2019 at 01:01 PM
- Updated: Aug 29, 2020 at 05:10 PM
A post is getting viral on social media claiming that a scientist from Britain has stated that if sprouted wheat is consumed for 2 days empty stomach in morning, diabetes can be cured completely and consuming the same for 3 days will never give you a heart attack. As per the claim, all you need to do is to boil the wheat for 10 minutes and sprout it after boiling. Vishvas News investigated the claims of the viral post and found that the viral post is misleading.
A Facebook post shared by a user named घरेलुनुस्के stated that a scientist from Britain claimed that if sprouted wheat is consumed for 2 days empty stomach in morning, diabetes can be cured completely and consuming the same for 3 days will never give you a heart attack.
Vishvas News started its investigation by breaking down various elements of the viral claim. We searched online reports on whether any scientist from Britain has made such claim that if sprouted wheat is consumed for 2 days empty stomach in morning, diabetes can be cured completely and consuming the same for 3 days will never give you a heart attack. We did not find any report by a scientist from Britain supporting such claim.
Vishvas News spoke to Dr. Sujeet Jha, Director of Institute of Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism at Max Healthcare regarding the viral message. He said: “This claim is not really true. We are using pseudoscience on diet and trying to reach easy solution by managing diet and making lifestyle changes. But saying that consuming sprouted wheat for 2 days can cure diabetes completely or consuming it for 3 days can never give you a heart attack is not true.”
Vishvas News also contacted Dr. Sudha, who is an Ayurveda Doctor. She said: “This claim is fake. It is impossible to cure diabetes or heart diseases in 2 or 3 days by consuming sprouted wheat.”
We further investigated and found a report at Centers for disease control and prevention which stated, “there isn’t a cure yet for diabetes, but losing weight, eating healthy food, and being active can really help. Taking medicine as needed, getting diabetes self-management education and support, and keeping health care appointments can also reduce the impact of diabetes on your life.”
As per Dr Avni Kaul, Nutritionist, “Diabetes can be managed and cured with diet and lifestyle changes, it cannot be cured completely.”
Although there are some reports online which suggest that sprouted wheat has certain health benefits, but nowhere has it been mentioned that it can cure heart diseases and diabetes completely.
Conclusion The post claiming that consuming sprouted wheat empty stomach in morning can cure diabetes completely or can prevent heart attack is misleading.
- Claim Review : Sprouted wheat can cure diabetes and prevent heart attack
- Claimed By : FB User-घरेलु नुस्के
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.