SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Post claiming Combiflam can kill you is fake
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-post-claiming-combiflam-can-kill-you-is-misleading/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Post claiming Combiflam can kill you is fake
- Published: Dec 24, 2019 at 04:20 PM
A post shared on Facebook claims that if you pop a Combiflam pill, it may kill you. The message also requests its readers to share it with their family and friends. The viral message is circulating across social media platforms. Here is the archived version of the post.
The message is circulating online since 2015 when the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) has found Combiflam to be substandard in its tests. Combiflam batch number A151195, manufactured in October, 2015, failed the disintegration test of CDSCO, as per Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO).
Many media houses reported the same.
Combiflam is manufactured by the company named Sanofi India. Sanofi India had issued a statement regarding Combiflam. As per the statement, “Some batches of Combiflam® tablets manufactured between 2015 and the first half of 2016 were found to have a ‘delayed disintegration’ time, as they took longer than the stipulated time of 15 minutes to disintegrate completely. This was qualified as a Class III recall, wherein consumption of the product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences.”
The report further stated: “In the case of Combiflam®, though the disintegration time was delayed, doctors and patients who have prescribed or consumed Combiflam® can be assured that there is no impact on the safety and efficacy of the product.”
On the corrective measures, the company had stated: “We have been working closely with CDSCO and have taken necessary action as required. As a result of the technical actions taken to resolve this issue, there have been no deviations in the samples of the subsequent batches.”
Mentioning about the safety of the Combiflam, the company stated: “Sanofi India is an ethical and patient-centric company, and we assure all our consumers that Combiflam® continues to remain a safe and efficacious analgesic. The Company has taken all suitable measures and acted in compliance with the regulatory directives.”
Post claiming that popping a Combiflam will kill you is fake. An overdose of any medicine can be harmful. Medicines should also be consumed under doctor’s supervision. The fake message is circulating across social media since 2015.
- Claim Review : Popping a combiflam can kill you
- Claimed By : FB User: Goney William
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.