SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Post claiming cheap and harmful tablets contain tissue paper is fake
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-post-claiming-cheap-and-harmful-tablets-contain-tissue-paper-is-fake/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Post claiming cheap and harmful tablets contain tissue paper is fake
- Published: Jul 16, 2019 at 03:50 PM
A video is getting viral on social media claiming that low-quality tablets are opening up into a tissue paper and are available in the market. Vishvas News investigated and found that the tablets are not for the consumption as a medicine but it is actually the tissue paper packed in the form of tablets. The viral claim is false.
The viral video on Facebook claims that the low-quality tablets are available in the market that opens up into a tissue paper. The man in the video states that medicine’s composition is not written on the cover of the medicine. Neither there is manufacturing date of the medicine nor there is an expiry date. Only the name of the medicine, Zota is mentioned.
We found multiple videos circulating all across the internet with the same claim.
“In the viral video, it is pure tissue paper. It is not medicine. We had procured that tablet tissue for gifting purpose to doctors. We had already mentioned the instruction on that pack but unfortunately, someone had misused & destroyed our image. These were compressed wipes and not tablets, and they had distributed these to doctors are part of a promotional plan.
Tissue tablets are actually quite popular and easy to buy online. These tissues are also given in several restaurants to customers. Simply pouring some water on them does the magic. The tablet unravels into a tissue.“
Searching the keywords “Zota Tissue Tablet” on Google Search, we found a video. The video explained the details of the same tablet as shown in the viral video.
It is actually a tissue paper rolled in the form of a tablet. It is not a medicine for consumption.
The tissue tablets are not unheard of and are very easily available online.
The description of the tissue tablets in search result mentioned: Tissue tablet is a unique compressed paper napkin in the shape of a tablet which expands in a few seconds after adding water.
Post claiming cheap and harmful tablets contain tissue paper is fake.
Knowing the truth is your right. If you have a doubt on any news that could impact you, society or the nation, let us know. You can share your doubts and send you news for fact verification on our mail ID contact@vishvasnews.com or WhatsApp us on 9205270923
- Claim Review : cheap and harmful tablets contain tissue paper
- Claimed By : FB User: हिंदुस्तान हमारी जान