SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Post claiming coconut oil can prevent dengue is fake
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-post-claiming-coconut-oil-can-prevent-dengue-is-fake/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Post claiming coconut oil can prevent dengue is fake
- Published: Jul 17, 2019 at 04:50 PM
A message is getting viral on social media claiming that coconut oil can prevent dengue. The message is attributed to Dr. B. Sukumar of Sri Saisudha Hospital, Tirupati. The post has been uploaded by a Facebook page named “Time News International.”
A message is doing rounds on social media that reads: “This message is to inform you all that the dengue viral is going on. So please use coconut oil below your knees to your footsteps. It is an antibiotic. And a dengue viral can not fly higher than knees. So please keep this in mind & start using it. Spread this message to as much as you can. Your one message can save many life’s.” The message is attributed to Dr. B. Sukumar of Sri Saisudha Hospital.
As per World Health Organization, Dengue virus is transmitted by female mosquitoes mainly of the species Aedes aegypti.
We contacted Dr. Sajeev Kumar, who is a general physician. He said that: “coconut oil for dengue is no cure to prevent dengue.”
As per the US National Library of Medicine, Virgin coconut oil does have some antimicrobial properties but there are no randomized controlled trials that have proven its efficacy in active infection.
There are no scientific evidences that support coconut oil can prevent dengue.
We scanned the social profile of the Facebook page Time News International that shared the post. The page was created on February 12, 2016 and has 346,903 followers so far.
Post claiming coconut oil can prevent dengue is fake. Dr. B. Sukumar has not prescribed coconut oil for dengue prevention as claimed in the viral post.
Knowing the truth is your right. If you have a doubt on any news that could impact you, society or the nation, let us know. You can share your doubts and send you news for fact verification on our mail ID contact@vishvasnews.com or whatsapp us on 9205270923
- Claim Review : Coconut oil can prevent dengue
- Claimed By : Fb Page: Time News International