SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Quick Fact Check: Fake Post Claiming Anaesthetics Can Kill Coronavirus Resurfaces
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/quick-fact-check-fake-post-claiming-anaesthetics-can-kill-coronavirus-resurfaces/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Quick Fact Check: Fake Post Claiming Anaesthetics Can Kill Coronavirus Resurfaces
Fake post claiming coronavirus vaccine interferes with anesthesia has resurfaced on social media. As per medical experts, it is completely safe to administer anesthesia, local or general, after the coronavirus vaccine.
- Published: Sep 23, 2021 at 07:46 PM
- Updated: Sep 28, 2021 at 11:29 AM
New Delhi (Vishvas News): A post has resurfaced on social media which claims that coronavirus vaccine interferes with anesthesia and anesthesia should not be administered till four weeks after taking the coronavirus vaccine. Vishvas News had earlier investigated the post and found it to be fake. Experts suggest that it is completely safe to administer anesthesia after someone gets the COVID-19 vaccine.
Vishvas News investigated by reaching out to Dr. Amit Malviya, MD, Anesthesiologist at AIIMS (All India Institute of Medical Science). He stated that the claim is fake.
We also contacted Dr. Sanjeev Kumar, the nodal officer of COVID-19 in AIIMS, Patna. He said that it is completely safe to administer anesthesia, local or general, after coronavirus vaccine.
We further investigated by searching on Google using appropriate keywords. We found a notification by the Malaysian Society of Anaesthesiologists and the College of Anesthesiologists, Academy of Medicine of Malaysia. They have rubbished the claim and termed it as misleading.
Anesthesia is a drug that is given to the patient to make the patient unconscious before performing the surgery so that he does not remember anything and does not feel any discomfort during the surgery.
Conclusion: Fake post claiming coronavirus vaccine interferes with anesthesia has resurfaced on social media. As per medical experts, it is completely safe to administer anesthesia, local or general, after the coronavirus vaccine.
- Claim Review : Anyone who has been vaccinated against coronavirus is prohibited from taking any type of anesthetic, even local anesthetics or dentist’s anesthetics, because this poses a great danger to the life of the vaccinated person and is highly dangerous. There is a possibility of death.. Therefore, the vaccinated person must wait 4 weeks after the vaccination. If he has a reaction, he can administer anesthetic only 4 weeks after the antibody develops. A Pharmacy’s friend relative was vaccinated two days ago. He went to the dentist yesterday and died immediately after receiving local anesthetics. After reading the warning about the coronavirus vaccination in the vaccine box, we discovered that after the coronavirus vaccine was given, there was a warning not to take anesthetics. Please spread this information to protect your family, relatives, friends and everyone
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.