SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: No, this home-made mixture cannot cure cancer in 3 days
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-no-this-home-made-mixture-cannot-cure-cancer-in-3-days/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: No, this home-made mixture cannot cure cancer in 3 days
- Published: Dec 3, 2019 at 05:44 PM
- Updated: Dec 10, 2019 at 06:42 PM
A viral video on social media claims that last stage cancer can be cured in 72 hours by consuming a home-made mixture made of walnut, sprouted grains, honey, garlic, and lemon. As per the video, the mixture needs to be stored in the fridge and eaten multiple times a day. The caption in the video written in Hindi reads: 3 दाने खाने से 72 घंटे में हो जाता है लास्ट स्टेज कैंसर भी जड़ से खत्म | canser ka ilaaj (English: Eating 3 grains can cure last stage cancer in 72 hours). Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral claim is false.
A viral video on social media is shared with a caption that reads: 3 दाने खाने से 72 घंटे में हो जाता है लास्ट स्टेज कैंसर भी जड़ से खत्म | canser ka ilaaj. (English: Eating 3 grains can cure last stage cancer in 72 hours). In the viral video, it has been claimed that last stage cancer can be cured in 72 hours by consuming a home-made mixture made of walnut, sprouted grains, honey, garlic, and lemon. As per the video, the mixture needs to be stored in the fridge and eaten multiple times a day.
The video has 107,733 views on Youtube so far.
We read the caption of the video carefully and the spelling of cancer was mis-spelt.
We further investigated whether diet has got anything to do with cancer prevention and treatment. We found a report on the website of the American Institute of Cancer research which states “no single food or food component can protect you against cancer by itself. But research shows that a diet filled with a variety of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, beans and other plant foods help lower risk for many cancers.”
A video claiming that cancer can be cured in 72 hours by consuming mixture made of walnut, sprouted grains, garlic, honey, and lemon is fake.
- Claim Review : This home-made mixture can cure cancer in 3 days
- Claimed By : Youtube channel: Health tips for you
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.