SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Quick Fact Check: Fake post on image determining the state of mind resurfaces
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/quick-fact-check-fake-post-on-image-determining-the-state-of-mind-resurfaces/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Quick Fact Check: Fake post on image determining the state of mind resurfaces
The post claiming that the image created by a Japanese neurologist checks a person’s level of stress is fake. The post is actually created by Yurii Perepadia, who is a graphic designer from Ukraine. And, it does not determine the state of mind or levels of stress.
- Published: Jan 7, 2020 at 04:26 PM
A fake post has resurfaced on social media in which it is claimed that an image created by a Japanese Neurologist can determine the state of mind. The image can check the person’s level of stress as per the text in the viral post. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral post is fake.
An image shared on Facebook by a user named Rashmi Arora reads: “This is a still image created by a Japanese Neurologist, Yamamoto. As per the Neurologist, if you find it as a still image, you are healthy, if the image appears to be shaky, you are a little stressed or you have not got a sound sleep during night, if you find the image circulating, then you are stressed and you need some rest, if you find the image moving fast, you are highly stressed and you need treatment.” You can see the archived post here.
Vishvas News had debunked the fake post sometime back and you can check the fact-checked article by clicking here.
Conclusion: The post claiming that the image created by a Japanese neurologist checks a person’s level of stress is fake. The post is actually created by Yurii Perepadia, who is a graphic designer from Ukraine. And, it does not determine the state of mind or levels of stress.
- Claim Review : Image determines the state of mind
- Claimed By : FB Page: Rashmi Arora
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.