SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: No, Miracle Mineral Solution cannot cure diseases such as autism or depression, this is a fake news﻿
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-no-miracle-mineral-solution-cannot-cure-diseases-such-as-autism-or-depression/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: No, Miracle Mineral Solution cannot cure diseases such as autism or depression, this is a fake news
- Published: Oct 19, 2019 at 07:21 PM
- Updated: Aug 29, 2020 at 04:52 PM
A post is doing rounds on Facebook claiming that a Miracle Mineral Solution can cure diseases such as autism, parasites and depression. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral post is fake.
A post shared on Facebook by a user named Jay Legg reads: “Drinking my miracle mineral solution. It has cured my autism, parasites and depression. You should too.” The text is accompanied by a Wikipedia link of the miracle mineral solution. The photo uploaded in the post is that of a bleaching solution.
FDA warms people not to fall prey on the posts asking to consume miracle mineral supplements as it can cause various health problems. The article states: “If you’re drinking “Miracle” or “Master” Mineral Solution or other sodium chlorite products, stop now. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has received many reports that these products, sold online as “treatments,” have made consumers sick.”
Many other websites also published that miracle mineral supplement will not cure diseases. For example, a website named Vice published an article the screenshot of which is given below:
The website named USA Today also published similar report:
The image shown in the Facebook post is that of Clorox, which is a bleach. It is used as a disinfectant for cleaning purposes.
Vishvas News contacted Dr B.S. Arora who is a physiatrist. He said: “The claim stating that drinking miracle mineral solution can cure autism, parasites and depression is completely fake. In fact, this can cause serious problems if consumed.”
The post claiming that a miracle mineral solution can cure diseases is fake.
- Claim Review : Miracle Mineral Solution can cure diseases such as autism or depression
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.