SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Quick Fact Check: Fake Post Claiming WHO Listed Out 7 Brain Damaging Habits Resurfaces
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/quick-fact-check-fake-post-claiming-who-listed-out-7-brain-damaging-habits-resurfaces/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Quick Fact Check: Fake Post Claiming WHO Listed Out 7 Brain Damaging Habits Resurfaces
The post claiming WHO issued 7 brain damaging habits is falsely attributed to the organization. While the seven habits mentioned in the viral post do not directly lead to brain damage, however, it can cause serious health complications when done in excess.
- Published: Mar 14, 2021 at 03:28 PM
- Updated: Mar 15, 2021 at 04:38 PM
New Delhi (Vishvas News): A post has resurfaced on social media claiming that World Health Organization (WHO) has laid down the 7 biggest brain damaging habits. The image also has the logo of World Health Organization. When Vishvas News earlier investigated the post, we found it to be fake.
An image going viral on social media claims that World Health Organization (WHO) has laid down 7 biggest brain damaging habits. These include missing breakfast, sleeping late, high sugar consumption, more sleeping especially in the morning, eating meals while watching TV or computer, wearing a cap/scarf or socks while sleeping, the habit of blocking/stopping urine.
The archived version of the post can be checked here.
Vishvas News earlier investigated by breaking the claims of the viral post one by one. While conducting the preliminary check we found that the viral claim is filled with grammatical and syntax errors.
If this has been released by the World Health Organization, there wouldn’t have been so many errors.
The post is shared on Facebook by a user named Arvind Bhullha. We scanned the profile of the user and found the user is based out of Bangalore.
Conclusion: The post claiming WHO issued 7 brain damaging habits is falsely attributed to the organization. While the seven habits mentioned in the viral post do not directly lead to brain damage, however, it can cause serious health complications when done in excess.
- Claim Review : World Health Organization (WHO) has laid down the 7 biggest brain damaging habits
- Claimed By : FB user Arvind Bhullha
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.