SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: No, Knuckle Cracking Does Not Cause Arthritis
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-no-knuckle-cracking-does-not-cause-arthritis/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: No, Knuckle Cracking Does Not Cause Arthritis
- Published: Aug 2, 2019 at 06:10 PM
A post is doing rounds on social media claiming that cracking your knuckles can cause arthritis. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral message is fake.
The viral post on social media claims that cracking the knuckles can lead to arthritis.
As per US National Library of Medicine, the relation of habitual knuckle cracking to osteoarthrosis with functional impairment of the hand has long been considered an old wives’ tale without experimental support.
As per a report by Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, cracking your knuckles may aggravate the people around you, but it probably won’t raise your risk for arthritis.
As per Johns Hopkins Arthritis Center, there is no evidence that cracking knuckles causes any damage such as arthritis in the joints. However, a couple of reports in the medical literature are available associating knuckle cracking with injury of the ligaments surrounding the joint or dislocation of the tendons ( attachments of muscles to bones) which improved with conservative treatment.
As per the Library of Congress, scientists explain that synovial fluid present in your joints acts as a lubricant. The fluid contains the gases oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide. When you pop or crack a joint, you stretch the joint capsule. Gas is rapidly released, which forms bubbles. In order to crack the same knuckle again, you have to wait until the gases return to the synovial fluid.
The post claiming that cracking the knuckles cause arthritis is fake.
Knowing the truth is your right. If you have a doubt on any news that could impact you, society or the nation, let us know. You can share your doubts and send you news for fact verification on our mail ID contact@vishvasnews.com or whatsapp us on 9205270923
- Claim Review : Knuckle Cracking Cause Arthritis