SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Okra-soaked water cannot cure diabetes
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-okra-soaked-water-cannot-cure-diabetes/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Okra-soaked water cannot cure diabetes
- Published: Sep 5, 2019 at 06:31 PM
- Updated: Sep 10, 2019 at 11:46 AM
A viral post claims that soaking okra ends in water overnight and drinking the water the next day can cure diabetes. Vishvas News investigated and found that okra has certain health benefits but diabetes cannot be completely cured with Okra.
A post is getting viral stating that soaking okra ends in water overnight and drinking the water the next day can cure diabetes. The post is getting viral across many social media platforms.
During our investigation, we found that a 2012 textbook Bioactive Food as Dietary Interventions for Diabetes stated that, “there is anecdotal evidence for the amelioration of diabetes by dietary consumption of okra but what are lacking are controlled clinical trials. There are constituents of okra such as polyphenolic molecules that provide encouragement for such studies in the future.“
Reports suggest that okra has certain health benefits but to validate whether the statement diabetes can be cured through soaking okra ends in water overnight and drinking the water next day is yet to be verified.
We further investigated and found a report at Centers for disease control and prevention which stated, “there isn’t a cure yet for diabetes, but losing weight, eating healthy food, and being active can really help. Taking medicine as needed, getting diabetes self-management education and support, and keeping health care appointments can also reduce the impact of diabetes on your life.”
As per Dr Avni Kaul, Nutritionist, “Diabetes can be managed and cured with diet and lifestyle changes, it cannot be cured completely.”
The post claiming that soaking okra ends in water overnight and drinking the water the next day can cure diabetes is misleading. Okra cannot cure diabetes, however, diabetes can be managed through certain diet and lifestyle changes.
Knowing the truth is your right. If you have a doubt on any news that could impact you, society or the nation, let us know. You can share your doubts and send you news for fact verification on our mail ID contact@vishvasnews.com or whatsapp us on 9205270923
- Claim Review : Okra-soaked water can cure diabetes