SOURCE: Vishvas News — Health Fact Checks
TITLE: Fact Check: Post claiming China seeks court’s approval to kill 20000 coronavirus patients is fake
URL: https://www.vishvasnews.com/english/health/fact-check-post-claiming-china-seeks-courts-approval-to-kill-20000-coronavirus-patients-is-fake/
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Fact Check: Post claiming China seeks court’s approval to kill 20000 coronavirus patients is fake
Post claiming China seeks court’s approval to kill 20000 coronavirus patients is fake. The content has been taken from a website which is unreliable and has been publishing junk stories.
- Published: Feb 12, 2020 at 12:55 PM
- Updated: Apr 24, 2020 at 07:52 PM
A viral post on social media claims that China seeks for court’s approval to kill over 20,000 coronavirus patients to avoid further spread of the virus. Vishvas News investigated and found that the viral post is fake.
A post doing rounds on social media shared by a page named Science Facts reads: “China seek for court’s approval to kill the over 20,000 coronavirus patients to avoid further spread of the virus.” The archived version of the post can be checked here.
When we read the entire content, we found that the report was full of errors (spelling and grammatical).
We further investigated and found that the website has been publishing junk news stories earlier as well.
This website has also previously spread fake news about the coronavirus. The government of Singapore released a statement refuting the claim.
We searched the claim on the website of “The Supreme People’s Court Of The People’s Republic Of China”. there was no mention of the case in this website.
World Health Organization (WHO) has been publishing Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Situation Reports.
These reports give statistics on the situation of the novel coronavirus outbreak in China and other countries.
If China was seeking the court’s approval to kill 20,000 people to stop further spread of the virus, the World Health Organization (WHO) would have reported it. There is no mention such a report on the website of World Health Organization (WHO).
Disclaimer: The #CoronavirusFacts database records fact-checks published since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak. The pandemic and its consequences are constantly evolving and data that was accurate weeks or even days ago might have changed. Remember to check the date when the fact-check you are reading was published before sharing it.
Conclusion: Post claiming China seeks court’s approval to kill 20000 coronavirus patients is fake. The content has been taken from a website which is unreliable and has been publishing junk stories.
- Claim Review : China seeks court's approval to kill 20000 coronavirus patients
- Claimed By : FB Page: Science Facts
Know the truth! If you have any doubts about any information or a rumor, do let us know!
Knowing the truth is your right. If you feel any information is doubtful and it can impact the society or nation, send it to us by any of the sources mentioned below.